 
The
Management

Series

Volume 1

The Data Series
The Organizing Series
The Personnel Series

by
L. Ron Hubbard

Bridge Publications, Los Angeles NEW ERA Publications International ApS
Published in the USA by
Bridge Publications, Inc.
4751 Fountain Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90029

ISBN 0-88404-672-9

Published in all other countries by
NEW ERA Publications International ApS
Store Kongensgade 55
Copenhagen K, Denmark

ISBN 87-7336-758-3

© 1991
L. Ron Hubbard Library
All Rights Reserved

No part of this book may be reproduced
without the permission of the copyright owner.

DIANETICS, HUBBARD, SCIENTOLOGY, E-METER, CELEBRITY CENTRE, FLAG, FREEWINDS, HCO,
PURIFICATION RUNDOWN, STUDENT HAT, METHOD ONE, LRH, FEBC, DSEC, Ability magazine, Ad-
vance! magazine, The Auditor magazine, Celebrity magazine, Centre magazine, KSW News maga-
zine, Understanding magazine, High Winds magazine, Source magazine. SCIENTOLOGY symbol and
DIANETICS symbol in circle are trademarks and service marks owned by Religious Technology Center
and are used with its permission. SCIENTOLOGIST is a collective membership mark designating mem-

bers of the affiliated churches and missions of Scientology.

Printed in the United States of America
Contents

THE DATA SERIES

HCO PL 26 Apr. 1970R The Anatomy of Thought
Data Series IR
HCO PL 11 May 1970 Logic
Data Series 2
HCO PL 11 May 1970-1 Further Illogics
Data Series 2-1
HCO PL 12 May 1970 Breakthroughs
Data Series 3
HCO PL 15 May 19701 Data and Situation Analyzing
Data Series 4
HCO PL 15 May 1970 I Information Collection
Data Series 5
HCO PL 17 May 1970R Data Systems
Data Series 6R
HCO PL 18 May 1970 Familiarity
Data Series 7
HCO PL 19 May 1970 Sanity
Data Series 8
HCO PL 23 May 1970 Errors
Data Series 9
HCO PL 23 June 1970 The Missing Scene
Data Series 10
HCO PL 30 June 1970 The Situation
Data Series 11
HCO PL 5 July 1970 How to Find and Establish an
Ideal Scene
Data Series 12
HCO PL 6July 1970 Irrationality
Data Series 13
HCO PL 7 July 1970 Working and Managing

Data Series 14

14

15

18

21

26

29

32

38

4]

46

50

58

68
HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

8 Aug.

19 Sept.

19 Sept.

19 Sept.

13 Oct.

26 Nov.

15 Mar.

31 Jan.

17 Feb.

29 Feb.

19 Mar.

12 June

25 May

19 Sept.

19 Sept.

19 Sept.

30 Sept.

1970

1970 I

1970 II

1970 Il

1970 II

1970

1971RA II

1972

1972

1972RA II

1972 II

1972R

1973

1973R I

1973-1

1973-2

1973 I

Wrong Target
Data Series 15

Investigatory Procedure
Data Series 16

Narrowing the Target
Data Series 17

Summary of Outpoints
Data Series 18

The Real Why
Data Series 19

More Outpoints
Data Series 20

Data Series Auditing
Data Series 21RA

The Why Is God
Data Series 22

Proper Format and Correct
Action
Data Series 23

Handling, Policy, Plans,
Programs, Projects and Orders
Defined

Data Series 24RA

Learning to Use Data Analysis
Data Series 25

Length of Time to Evaluate
Data Series 26R

Supplementary Evaluations
Data Series 27

Checking Evals
Data Series 28R

Checking Evaluations Addition
Data Series 28R-1

Multiple Sit Eval Format
Data Series 28R-2

Outpoints, More
Data Series 29

71

72

75

78

82

84

86

87

89

100

105

111

116

120

122

124

126
HCO PL 30 Sept. 1973 II Situation Finding 128

Data Series 30

HCO PL 25 Nov. 1973 I Final Targets 131
Data Series 31

HCO PL 25 Nov. 1973-1 Final Target Attachment 134
Data Series 31 Addition

HCO PL 14 Dec. 1973 Target Troubles 135
Data Series 32

HCO PL 3 July 1974RB Evaluation, Criticism Of 138
Data Series 33RB

HCO PL 18 July 1974 Situation Correction 140
Data Series 34

HCO PL 19 July 1974 Eval Correction 142
Data Series 35

HCO PL 11 Aug. 1974 Envisioning the Ideal Scene 144
Data Series 36

HCO PL 12 Aug. 1974 Whys Open the Door 146
Data Series 37

HCO PL 3 Oct. 1974 Pluspoint List 148
Data Series 38

HCO PL 28 Oct. 1974 Who-Where Finding 150
Data Series 39

HCO PL 12 Mar. 1975 II The Ideal Org 152
Data Series 40

HCO PL 15 Mar. 1977RA Evaluation: The Situation 154
Data Series 41RA

HCO PL 17 Mar. 1977RA Date Coincidence 163
Data Series 42RA

HCO PL 18 Mar. 1977RA Evaluation and Programs 167
Data Series 43RA

HCO PL 18 Mar. 1977-IR Evaluation Success 173
Data Series 43-IR

HCO PL 20 Mar. 1977R Super Evaluation 175
Data Series 44R

HCO PL 27 Sept. 1978 Examining Resources 177

Data Series 45
HCO PL 4 Jan.

HCO PL 7 June

HCO PL 26 Dec.

HCO PL 14 Oct.

HCO PL 28 Mar.

HCO PL_ 5 Nov.

THE ORGANIZING SERIES
HCO PL 13 Sept.

HCO PL 14 Sept.

HCO PL 14 Sept.

HCO PL 22 Sept.

HCO PL 26 Sept.

HCO PL 27 Sept.

HCO PL 1 Oct.

HCO PL 8 Oct.

HCO PL 28 Oct.

HCO PL 29 Oct.

HCO PL 1 Nov.

1979

1979R I

1979

1982

1984 I

1990

1970 II

1970 I

1970 II

1970

1970 Ol

1970 I

1970

1970

1970

1970

1970

The Ideal Ideal Scene
Data Series 46

Data Series PLs, Use Of
Data Series 47

Execution of Evaluations
Data Series 48

Why Things Are Evaluated
Data Series 49

The Stages of Analysis
Data Series 50

O/Ws and Evaluation
Data Series 51

Basic Organization
Org Series 1

Cope and Organize
Org Series 2

How to Organize an Org
Org Series 3

Hats
Org Series 4

Org Board Cutatives
Org Series 5

Cutative Prices
Org Series 6

Hats and Counter-Effort
Org Series 7

Organizing and Product
Org Series 8

Organizing and Hats
Org Series 9

The Analysis of Organization by

Product
Org Series 10

Organization and Morale
Org Series 1]

178

181

182

183

185

187

193

197

199

202

208

212

213

218

220

226

230
HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

2 Nov.

13 Nov.

14 Nov.

20 Nov.

25 Nov.

1 Dec.

6 Dec.

14 Dec.

30 Dec.

19 Jan.

25 Jan.

16 Feb.

6 Mar.

16 Mar.

25 Mar.

7 July

29 July

1970 II

1970

1970

1970

1970

1970

1970

1970

1970

1971

1971

1971 II

197]

1971 IV

1971

1971

1971 I

The Theory of Scientology
Organizations
Org Series 12

Planning by Product
Org Series 13

The Product as an Overt Act
Org Series 14

Organization Misunderstoods
Org Series 15

Policy and Orders
Org Series 16

Reality of Products
Org Series 17

Third Dynamic De-aberration
Org Series 18

Group Sanity
Org Series 19

Environmental Control
Org Series 20

Duplicating Functions
Org Series 21

Squirrel Admin
Org Series 22

Lines and Terminals
Org Series 23

Line Design—HGC Lines, an
Example
Org Series 24

Lines and Hats
Org Series 25

Valuable Final Products
Org Series 26

HCO Establishment Functions
Org Series 27

Why Hatting?
Org Series 28

234

239

242

244

249

254

261

266

280

283

284

288

291

293

295

298

301
HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

11 Aug.

14 July

23 July

28 July

13 July

13 July

20 Sept.

20 Sept.

14 Nov.

16 Nov.

20 July

9 Aug.

14 Feb.

28 Feb.

8 Mar.

10 Mar.

4 Apr.

1971 III

1972 I

1972RB

1972

1974 I

1974 II

1976

1976-1

1976

1976

1978

1979R II

1980

1980

1971R I

1971 I

1972 II

Infinite Expansion
Org Series 29

Esto Failures
Org Series 30

The Vital Necessity of Hatting
Org Series 31RB

Establishing, Holding the Form of
the Org
Org Series 32

Production Bugs
Org Series 33

Working Installations
Org Series 34

The Stat Push
Org Series 35

Stat Push Clarified
Org Series 35-1

Manning Up an Org
Org Series 36

Production Quotas
Org Series 37

Held From Above
Double-Hatting
Org Series 38

Service Product Officer
Org Series 39

Order Versus Disorder
Org Series 40

Production and One’s Standard
of Living
Org Series 41

Org Officer
Org Series 42

Establishment and the HAS
Org Series 43

Org Officers, Product Officers,
Estos
Org Series 44

303

304

308

312

316

317

318

322

324

326

330

332

342

350

354

356

358
HCO PL 19 Dec. 1982 I “Doing a Quicksilver” Forbidden 359

Org Series 45

HCO PL 29 Dec. 1982RA II The Tools of Management 363
Org Series 46RA

HCO PL 31 July 1983R I Basic Management Tools 368
Org Series 47R

HCO PL 31 July 1983 II Management Tools Breakthrough 373
Org Series 48

HCO PL 18 June 1985 Product Orientation 376
Org Series 49

THE PERSONNEL SERIES

HCO PL 29 Aug. 1970 I Personnel Transfers Can Destroy 381

an Org

Personnel Series 1

HCO PL 29 Aug. 1970 II Personnel Programing 385
Personnel Series 2

HCO PL 29 Aug. 1970 II Recruit in Excess 389
Personnel Series 3

HCO PL 30 Aug. 1970 Recruiting Actions 393
Personnel Series 4

HCO PL 10 Sept. 1970 Transferitis 398
Personnel Series 5

HCO PL 12 Sept. 1970 Training 401
Personnel Series 6

HCO PL 13 Sept. 1970 Hats —Vital Data 403
Personnel Series 7

HCO PL 16 Sept. 1970 Ethics and Personnel 406
Personnel Series 8

HCO PL 22 Sept. 1970 Hats 411
Personnel Series 9

HCO PL 6 Oct. 1970 1 “Moonlighting” 417
Personnel Series 10

HCO PL 9 Oct. 1970 The PR Personality 419
Personnel Series 1]

HCO PL 20 Nov. 1970 Organization Misunderstoods 421
Personnel Series 12
HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

6 Dec.

14 Dec.

30 Dec.

27 Dec.

19 Jan.

10 Feb.

16 Mar.

19 Mar.

29 July

11 Aug.

12 May

14 Nov.

29 Nov.

29 Mar.

19 Dec.

28 Mar.

21 Jan.

1970

1970

1970

1970

197]

1971 III

1971 IV

1971R I

1971 I

1971 II

1972R

1976

1978

1982

1982 I

1984 II

1991

Third Dynamic De-aberration
Personnel Series 13

Group Sanity
Personnel Series 14

Environmental Control
Personnel Series 15

Hats Program Pitfalls
Personnel Series 16

Duplicating Functions
Personnel Series 17

Adds to Ethics and Personnel
Personnel Series 18

Lines and Hats
Personnel Series 19

Personnel Prediction
Personnel Series 20R

Why Hatting?
Personnel Series 21

Don’t Unmock a Working
Installation
Personnel Series 22

PTS Personnel and Finance
Personnel Series 25R

Manning Up an Org
Personnel Series 28

How You Handle Demands for
Personnel
Personnel Series 29

Personnel Policy
Personnel Series 30

“Doing a Quicksilver” Forbidden
Personnel Series 31

Executive Posting Qualifications
Personnel Series 32

Moonripping
Personnel Series 33

426

431

445

448

450

451

452

454

457

459

460

463

465

466

467

471

474
About the Author

Subject Index

Alphabetical List of Contents
Chronological List of Contents
Bibliography

Address List

477
479
493
495
499
513
THE DATA SERIES
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 26 APRIL 1970R
Remimeo REVISED 15 MARCH 1975

Data Series IR

THE ANATOMY OF THOUGHT

There are many types of thought. Unless one knows these types he can make
serious errors on administrative lines.

In the unpublished work “Excalibur” (most of which has been released in
HCOBs, PLs and books) there was an important fundamental truth. This was:

SANITY IS THE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE DIFFERENCES, SIMILAR-
ITIES AND IDENTITIES.

This is also intelligence.

Two or more facts or things that are totally unlike are DIFFERENT. They
are not the same fact or same object.

Two or more facts or things that have something in common with one an-
other are SIMILAR.

Two or more facts or things that have all their characteristics in common
with one another are IDENTICAL.

SEMANTICS

In a subject developed by Korzybski a great deal of stress is given to the
niceties of words. In brief a word is NOT the thing. And an object exactly like
another object is different because it occupies a different space and thus “can’t
be the same object.”

As Alfred Korzybski studied under psychiatry and amongst the insane
(his mentor was William Alanson White at Saint Elizabeth’s insane asylum in
Washington, DC) one can regard him mainly as the father of confusion.

This work, “general semantics,” a corruption of semantics, (meaning really
“significance” or the “meaning of words”) has just enough truth in it to invite
interest and just enough curves to injure one’s ability to think or communicate.
Korzybski did not know the formula of human communication and university
professors teaching semantics mainly ended up assuring students (and proving it)
that no one can communicate with anyone because nobody really knows what
anybody else means. As this “modern” (it was known to the Greeks, was a specialty
of Sophists and was also used by Socrates) penetration into culture affects all
education in the West today, it is no wonder that current communication is badly

3
strained. Schools no longer teach basic logic. Due to earlier miseducation in
language and no real education in logic much broken-down “think” can occur in
high places.

A system of thinking derived from a study of psychotics is not a good yard-
stick to employ in solving problems. Yet the “thinking” of heads of states is
based on illogical and irrational rules. Populations, fortunately less “well educated,”
are assaulted by the irrational (kooky) “thinking” of governments. This “thinking”
is faulty mainly because it is based on the faulty logic shoved off on school-
children. “You must study geometry because that is the way you think” is an
idiocy that has been current for the past two or three decades in schools.

I have nothing against Korzybski. But the general impact of “general semantics”
has been to give us stupefied schoolboys who, growing up without any training
in logic except general semantics are giving us problems. Increasingly we are
dealing with people who have never been taught to think and whose native ability
to do so has been hampered by a false “education.”

ADMINISTRATIVE TROUBLE

At once this gives an administrator trouble. Outside and inside his sphere of
influence he is dealing with people who not only can’t think but have been
taught carefully to reach irrational conclusions.

One can make a great deal of headway and experience a lot of relief by
realizing the way things are and not getting exasperated and outraged by the
absurdities that he sees being used as “solutions.” He is dealing with people who
in school were not only not taught to think but were often taught the impossibility
of thinking or communicating.

This has a very vast influence on an administrator. Things that are perfectly
obvious to him get so muddled when passed for decision to others that an admin-
istrator tends to go into apathy or despair.

For instance it is completely logical to him that some activity must either cut
its expenses or make more money before it goes broke. So he passes this on as an
order demanding that the activity balance up its income—outgo ratio. He gets
back a “solution” that they “get a huge sum each week from their reserves” so
they will be “solvent.”” The administrator feels rattled and even betrayed. What
reserves? Do they have reserves? So he demands to know, has this activity been
salting away reserves he knew nothing about? And he receives a solemn
reply—no they don’t have any reserves but they consider the administrator should
just send them money!

The idiocy involved here is that the “logic” of the persons in that activity is
not up to realizing that you cannot take more out of something than is in it.

And the activity mentioned is not alone. Today the “assets” of a company
are said by “competent economists” to be its property— goodwill—cash added to
its debts! In short, if you have ten pennies and owe £1000 then your assets are
£1000-0-10!

Yes, you say, but that’s crazy! And you’re right.

For an example of modern “think” the Ford Foundation is believed to have

4
financially supported the arming of revolutionary groups so they will be dependent
upon the capitalistic system and won’t overthrow it even though the revolutionary
group could not exist without Ford Foundation support!

A war is fought and continued for years to defend the property rights of
landlords against peasants although the landlords are mostly dead.

Electronic computers are exported under government license and paid for by
the exporter and shipped to an enemy who could not bomb the exporter without
them in order to prevent the enemy from bombing the exporter.

Yes, one says. That’s treason. Not necessarily. It is the inability to think! It
is the result of suppressing the native ability by false systems of “logic.”

PROPER DEFINITIONS

People who annoy one with such weird “solutions” do not know certain
differences.

Thoughts are infinitely divisible into classes of thought.

In other words, in thought there are certain wide differences which are very
different indeed.

A FACT is something that can be proven to exist by visible evidence.
An OPINION is something which may or may not be based on any facts.
Yet a sloppy mind sees no difference between a FACT and somebody’s opinion.

In courts a psychiatrist (who is an AUTHORITY) says “Joe Doakes is crazy.”
Joe Doakes is promptly put away for ten years, tortured or killed. Yet this state-
ment is just an OPINION uttered by somebody whose sanity is more than suspect
and what’s more is taken from a field “psychiatry” which has no basis in fact
since it cannot cure or even detect insanity.

A vast number of people see no difference at all in FACTS and OPINIONS
and gaily accept both or either as having equal validity.

An administrator continually gets opinions on his lines which are masquerading
as facts.

If opinion instead of facts are used in solving problems then one comes up
with insane solutions.

Here is an example: By opinion it is assumed there are 3000 pounds of
potatoes available in a crop. An order is therefore written and payment ($300 at
10 cents a pound) is made for the crop. One sack of potatoes is delivered con-
taining 100 pounds. That sack was the fact. Loss is 2900 pounds of potatoes.

An administrator runs into this continually. He sends somebody to find an
electric potato peeler “just like the one we had.” He gets back a paring knife
because it is the same.

The administrator orders a similar type of shirt and gets overcoats.

5
The administrator feels he is dealing with malice, sharp practice, laziness,
etc., etc. He can lose all faith in honesty and truthfulness.

The ACTUAL REASON he is getting such breakdowns is:

SANITY IS THE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE DIFFERENCES, SIMILAR-
ITIES AND IDENTITIES.

The people with whom he is dealing can’t think to such a degree that they
give him insane situations. Such people are not crazy. Their thinking is sup-
pressed and distorted by modern “education.” “You can’t really communicate to
anybody because the same word means different things to everyone who uses it.”
In other words, all identities are different.

A BASIC LAW is usually confused by students with an INCIDENTAL
FACT. This is conceiving a similarity when one, the law, is so far senior to the
fact that one could throw the fact away and be no poorer.

When a student or an employee cannot USE a subject he studies or cannot
seem to understand a situation his disability is that basics are conceived by him to
be merely similar to incidental remarks.

The law, “Objects fall when dropped,” is just the same to him as the casual
example “a cat jumped off a chair and landed on the floor.” Out of this he
fixedly keeps in mind two “things he read’’—objects fall when dropped, a cat
jumped off a chair and landed on the floor. He may see these as having identical
value whereas they are similar in subject but widely different in VALUE.

You give this person a brief write-up of company policy. “Customers must
be satisfied with our service,” begins the write-up. Of course that’s a law
because it has been found to be catastrophic to violate it. On down the page is
written, “A card is sent to advise the customer about the order.” The employee
says he understands all this and goes off apparently happy to carry out his duties.
A few weeks later Smith and Co. write and say they will do no more business
with you. You hastily try to find out WHY. If you’re lucky enough to track it
down, you find the shipping clerk sent them a card saying, “Your order was
received and we don’t intend to fill it.”

You have the clerk in. You lay down the facts. He looks at you glumly and
says he’s sorry. He goes back and pulls another blooper. You threaten to fire
him. He’s now cost the company $54,000. He is contrite.

All he understands is that life is confusing and that for some mysterious
reason you are mad at him, probably because you are naturally grouchy.

What he doesn't know is what the administrator seldom taps. It isn’t that
he doesn’t know “company policy.” It’s that he doesn’t know the difference
between a law and a comment!

A law of course is something with which one thinks. It is a thing to which
one aligns other junior facts and actions. A law lets one PREDICT that if ALL
OBJECTS FALL when not supported, then of course cats, books and plates can
be predicted in behavior if one lets go of them. As the employee hasn’t a clue

6
that there is any difference amongst laws, facts, opinions, orders or suggestions
he of course cannot think as he doesn’t have anything to which he can align other
data or with which to predict consequences.

He doesn’t even know that company policy is, “Too many goofs equals
fired.” So when he does get sacked he thinks “somebody got mad at him.”

If you think this applies only to the ‘“‘stupid employee,’ know that a whole
government service can go this way. Two such services only promoted officers to
high rank if they sank their own ships or got their men killed! Social acceptability
was the only datum used for promotion and it followed that men too socially
involved (or too drunk) of course lost battles.

An organization, therefore, can itself be daffy if it has a concept that laws
and facts and opinions are all the same thing and so has no operating policies or
laws.

Whole bodies of knowledge can go this route. The laws are submerged into
incidental facts. The incidental facts are held onto and the laws never pointed up
as having the special value of aligning other data or actions.

An administrator can call a conference on a new building, accidentally col-
lect people who can't differentiate amongst laws, facts, opinions or suggestions—
treating them of equal value—and find himself not with a new building but a
staggering financial loss.

As the world drifts along with its generations less and less taught and more
and more suppressed in thinking, it will of course experience more and more
catastrophes in economics, politics and culture and so go boom. As all this in-
fluences anyone in any organization it is an important point.

PERSONNEL

In despair an administrator enters the field of choosing personnel by experience
with them. He embraces a very cruel modern system that fires at once anybody
who flubs.

Actually he is trying to defend himself against some hidden menace he has
never defined but which haunts him day by day.

The majority of people with whom he deals—and especially governments—
cannot conceive of:

|. differences,
2. similarities,
3. identities.

As a result they usually can’t tell a FACT from an OPINION (because all
differences are probably identities and all identities are different and all similarities
are imaginary).

A=A=A

We have a broad dissertation on this in Dianetics: The Modern Science of

7
Mental Health as it affects insane behavior. Everything is everything else. Mr. X
looks at a horse, knows it’s a house, knows it’s a schoolteacher. So when he sees
a horse he is respectful.

When anyone in an org is sanely trying to get things done he sometimes
feels like he is spinning from the replies and responses he gets to orders or
requests. That’s because observation was faulty or think was faulty at the other
end of the comm line.

As he tries to get things done he begins to realize (usually falsely) that he is
regarded as odd for getting impatient.

THE WAYS OUT

There are several ways out of this mess.

a.

One is to issue orders that demand close observation and execution.
Issuance of clear orders provides no faintest opportunity of error, as-
sumption or default.

Another is to demand that an order is fully understood before it is exe-
cuted.

A third is to be sure one totally understands any order one receives
before one goes off to do it or order it done.

One is to deal only in ORDERS and leave nothing to interpretation.

Another is to pretest personnel on one’s lines for ability to observe and
conceive differences, similarities and identities.

The effective way is to get the personnel processed.
A useful way is to educate people with drills until they can think.

Another way is to defend one’s areas by excluding insofar as possible
adjacent areas where crippled think is rampant.

A harsh way is to plow under zones whose irrationality is destructive
(such as psychiatry).

THOUGHT CONFUSIONS

Wherever you have thought confusions (where FACT = OPINION, where
suggestion = orders, where an observation is taken as a direction, etc., etc.,
etc.) an administrator is at serious risk.

Misunderstoods pile up on these short circuits. Out of misunderstoods come
hostilities. Out of these come overwork or destruction.

The need for all discipline can be traced back to the inability to think. Even

8
when appearing clever, criminals are idiots; they have not ever thought the
thought through.

One can conclude that anyone on management lines, high or low, is drasti-
cally affected by irrational think.

Individuals to whom differences are identities and identities are differences
can muddle up an operation to a point where disaster is inevitable.

These are the third dynamic facts with which an organization lives daily.

The fault can be very subtle so as to nearly escape close search or it can be
so very broad so that it is obvious and ridiculous. But on all admin lines, the
point that fails has not achieved the basic law:

SANITY IS THE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE DIFFERENCES, SIMILAR-
ITIES AND IDENTITIES.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 1I1 MAY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 2

LOGIC

The subject of logic has been under discussion for at least three thousand
years without any clean breakthrough of real use to those who work with data.

LOGIC means the subject of reasoning. Some in ages past have sought to
label it a science. But that can be discarded as pretense and pompousness.

If there were such a “science,” men would be able to think. And they can’t.

The term itself is utterly forbidding. If you were to read a text on logic, you
would go quite mad trying to figure it out, much less learn how to think.

Yet logic or the ability to reason is vital to an organizer or administrator. If
he cannot think clearly, he will not be able to reach the conclusions vital to make
correct decisions.

Many agencies, governments, societies, groups, capitalize upon this lack of
logic and have for a very long time. For the bulk of the last 2,000 years the main
Western educator—the Church—worked on the theory that man should be kept
ignorant. A population that is unable to think or reason can be manipulated
easily by falsehoods and wretched causes.

Thus logic has not been a supported subject, rather the opposite.

Even Western schools today seek to convince students they should study ge-
ometry as “that is the way they think.” And of course it isn’t.

The administrator, the manager, the artisan and the clerk each have a con-
siderable use for logic. If they cannot reason, they make costly and time-
consuming errors and can send the entire organization into chaos and oblivion.

Their stuff in trade are data and situations. Unless they can observe and
think their way through, they can reach wrong conclusions and take incorrect
actions.

Modern man thinks mathematics can serve him for logic and most of his
situations go utterly adrift because of this touching and misplaced confidence.
The complexity of human problems and the vast number of factors involved make
mathematics utterly inadequate.

Computers are at best only servomechanisms (crutches) to the mind. Yet the
chromium-plated civilization today has a childish faith in them. It depends on

10
who asks the questions and who reads the computer’s answers whether they are
of any use or not. And even then their answers are often madhouse silly.

Computers can’t think because the rules of live logic aren’t fully known to
man and computer builders. One false datum fed into a computer gives one a
completely wrong answer.

If people on management and work lines do not know logic, the organization
can go adrift and require a fabulous amount of genius to hold it together and
keep it running.

Whole civilizations vanish because of lack of logic in its rulers, leaders and
people.

So this is a very important subject.

UNLOCKING LOGIC
I have found a way now to unlock this subject. This is a breakthrough which
is no small win. If by it a formidable and almost impossible subject can be
reduced to simplicity, then correct answers to situations can be far more frequent
and an organization or a civilization far more effective.

The breakthrough is a simple one.

BY ESTABLISHING THE WAYS IN WHICH THINGS BECOME ILLOGI-
CAL, ONE CAN THEN ESTABLISH WHAT IS LOGIC.

In other words, if one has a grasp of what makes things illogical or irrational

(or crazy, if you please) it is then possible to conceive of what makes things
logical.

ILLOGIC

There are 5 primary ways for a relay of information or a situation to become
illogical.

1. Omit a fact.

2. Change sequence of events.
3. Drop out time.

4. Add a falsehood.

5. Alter importance.

These are the basic things which cause one to have an incorrect idea of a
situation.

Example: “He went to see a communist and left at 3:00 a.m.” The omitted
facts are that he went with 30 other people and that it was a party. By omitting
the fact, one alters the importance. This omission makes it look like “he” is
closely connected to communism! When he isn’t.

11
Example: ‘The ship left the dock and was loaded.” Plainly made crazy by
altering sequence of events.

Example: “The whole country is torn by riots” which would discourage vis-
iting it in 1970 if one didn’t know the report date of 1919.

Example: “He kept skunks for pets” which as an added falsehood makes a
man look odd if not crazy.

Example: ‘It was an order” when in fact it was only a suggestion, which of
course shifts the importance.

There are hundreds of ways these 5 mishandlings of data can then give one a
completely false picture.

When basing actions or orders on data which contains one of the above, one
then makes a mistake.

REASON DEPENDS ON DATA.

WHEN DATA IS FAULTY (as above) THE ANSWER WILL BE WRONG
AND LOOKED UPON AS UNREASONABLE.

There are a vast number of combinations of these 5 data. More than one (or
all 5) may be present in the same report.

Observation and its communication may contain one of these 5.

If so, then any effort to handle the situation will be ineffective in correcting
or handling it.

USE

If any body of data is given the above 5 tests, it is often exposed as an
invitation to acting illogically.

To achieve a logical answer one must have logical data.

Any body of data which contains one or more of the above faults can lead
one into illogical conclusions.

The basis of an unreasonable or unworkable order is a conclusion which is
made illogical by possessing one or more of the above faults.

LOGIC
Therefore, logic must have several conditions:
1. All relevant facts must be known.
Events must be in actual sequence.

Time must be properly noted.

- YN

The data must be factual, which is to say true or valid.

12
5. Relative importances amongst the data must be recognized by compar-
ing the facts with what one is seeking to accomplish or solve.

NOT KNOW
One can always know something about anything.

It is a wise man who, confronted with conflicting data, realizes that he
knows at least one thing—that he doesn’t know.

Grasping that, he can then take action to find out.

If he evaluates the data he does find out against the 5 things above, he can
clarify the situation. Then he can reach a logical conclusion.

DRILLS
It is necessary to work out your own examples of the 5 violations of logic.
By doing so, you will have gained skill in sorting out the data of a situation.
When you can sort out data and become skilled in it, you will become very

difficult to fool and you will have taken the first vital step in grasping a correct
estimate of any situation.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 11 MAY 1970-1]
Remimeo ADDITION OF 23 SEPTEMBER 1977

Data Series 2-1

FURTHER ILLOGICS

Data Series 2, LOGIC, lists the 5 primary points of illogic. There are 3
more points of illogic that evaluators should know well and use.

These are:
ASSUMED “IDENTITIES” ARE NOT IDENTICAL

ASSUMED “SIMILARITIES” ARE NOT SIMILAR OR SAME
CLASS OF THING

ASSUMED “DIFFERENCES” ARE NOT DIFFERENT
Knowledge and study of Data Series IR, ANATOMY OF THOUGHT, and

Data Series 2, LOGIC, will give one an understanding of what these outpoints,
above, mean and how to recognize and use them in evaluation.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Assisted by
AVU Verification Officer
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 12 MAY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 3

BREAKTHROUGHS

There are two breakthroughs, actually, that have been made here in the age-
old philosophic subject of /ogic.

The first is FINDING A DATUM OF COMPARABLE MAGNITUDE TO
THE SUBJECT.

A single datum or subject has to have a datum or subject with which to
compare it before it can be fully understood.

By studying and isolating the principles that make a situation illogical, one
can then see what is necessary to be logical. This gives us a subject that could be
called “Illogicality Testing” or “Irrationality Location” but which would be bet-
ter described as DATA ANALYSIS. For it subjects data and therefore SITUA-
TIONS to tests which establish any falsity or truth.

The other breakthrough consists of the discovery that no rules of logic can
be valid unless one also includes the data being used. The nearest the ancients
came to this was testing the premise or basis of an argument.

Trying to study logic without also having the answers to data is like describing
everything about an engine without mentioning what fuel it runs on; or making a
sentence like “He argued about” or “She disliked” without completing it.

Logic concerns obtaining answers. And answers depend on data. Unless you
can test and establish the truth and value of the data being used, one cannot
attain right answers no matter what Aristotle may have said or what IBM may
have built.

The road to logic begins with ways and means of determining the value of
the data to be employed in it.

Without that step no one can arrive at logic.

Two things that are equal to each other and to which a third is equal are all
equal to one another. If A equals B and B equals C, then C equals A. Great.
This is often disputed as a theorem of logic and has been ever since Aristotle
said so. There is even a modern cult of non-Aristotelian logic.

The facts are that the ancient theorem is totally dependent on the DATA used
in it. Only if the DATA is correct does the theorem work.

15
Lacking emphasis on the data being used, this theorem can be proven true or
false at will. The philosophers point out the fallacy without ever giving emphasis
to data evaluation.

DATA ANALYSIS

Unless you can prove or disprove the data you use in any logic system, the
system itself will be faulty.

This is true of the IBM computer. It is true of CIA intelligence conclusions.
It is true of Plato, Kant, Hume and your own personal computer as well.

DATA ANALYSIS is necessary to ANY logic system and always will be.

Ships run on oil, electric motors on electricity and logic runs on data.

If the data being stuffed into a computer is incorrect, no matter how well a
computer is planned or built or proofed up against faults you can get a Bay of

Pigs.

In mathematics no formula will give an answer better than the data being
used in it.

VALID ANSWERS MAY ONLY BE ATTAINED IN USING VALID DATA.
Thus, if the subject of Data Analysis is neglected or imperfect or unknown
or unsuspected as a step, then wild answers to situations and howling catastrophes

can occur.

If Data Analysis becomes itself a codified subject, regardless of what formula
is going to be used, then right answers can only then be attained.

THE MIND AS A COMPUTER
The mind is a remarkable computer.

It is demonstrable that a mind which has the wrong answers removed from it
becomes brighter, IQ soars.

Therefore for our purposes we will consider the mind capable of being
logical.

As processing improves the mind’s ability to reach right answers, then we
can assume for our purposes that if a person can straighten out his data he can
be logical and will be logical and can attain right answers to situations.

The fallacy of the mind is that it can operate on wrong data.

Thus, if we specialize in the subject of DATA ANALYSIS we can assume
that a person can attain right answers.

16
As an administrator (and anyone else) has to reach conclusions in order to
act and has to act correctly to ensure his own or his group’s continued survival,
it is vital that he be able to observe and conclude with minimal error.

Thus, we will not be stressing HOW to think but how to analyze that with
which one thinks—which is DATA.

This gives us the importance and use of Data Analysis.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

17
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 15 MAY 1970

Remimeo Issue I

Data Series 4

DATA AND SITUATION ANALYZING

The two general steps one has to take to “find out what is really going on”
are:

1, Analyze the data,
2. Using the data thus analyzed to analyze the situation.

The way to analyze data is to compare it to the 5 primary points and see if
any of those appear in the data.

The way to analyze the situation is to put in its smaller areas each of the data
analyzed as above.

Doing this gives you the locations of greatest error or disorganization and
also gives you areas of greatest effectiveness.

Example: There is trouble in the Refreshment Unit. There are 3 people in
the unit. Doing a data analysis on the whole area gives us a number of outpoints.
Then we assign these to A, B and C who work in the unit and find B had the
most outpoints. This indicates that the trouble in the Refreshment Unit is with
B. B can be handled in various ways such as his hat, his attendance, etc. Note
we analyzed the data of the main area and assigned it to the bits in the area, then
we had an analyzed situation and we could handle.

Example: We analyze all the data we have about the Bingo Car Plant. We
assign the data thus analyzed as out (outpoints) to each function of the Bingo
Car Plant. We thus pinpoint what function is the worst off. We then handle that
function in various ways, principally by organizing it and grooving in its executives
and personnel.

There are several variations.

WE OBTAIN AN ANALYSIS OF THE SITUATION BY ANALYZING
ALL THE DATA WE HAVE AND ASSIGNING THE OUTPOINT DATA TO
THE AREAS OR PARTS. THE AREA HAVING THE MOST OUTPOINTS IS
THE TARGET FOR CORRECTION.

In confronting a broad situation to be handled, we have of course the problem

of finding out what’s wrong before we can correct it. This is done by data analysis
followed by situation analysis.

18
We do this by grading all the data for outpoints (5 primary illogics). We now
have a long list of outpoints. This is data analysis.

We sort the outpoints we now have into the principal areas of the scene. The
majority will appear in one area. This is situation analysis.

We now know what area to handle.

Example: Seventy data exist on the general scene. We find 21 of these data
are irrational (outpoints). We slot the 21 outpoints into the areas they came from
or apply to. Sixteen came from area G. We handle area G.

EXPERIENCE

The remarkable part of such an exercise is that the data analysis of the data
of a period of 1 day compares to 3 months operating experience.

Thus data and situation analysis is an instant result where experience takes a
lot of time.

The quality of the data analysis depends on one knowing the ideal organiza-
tion and purpose on which the activity is based. This means one has to know
what its activities are supposed to be from a rational or logical viewpoint.

A clock is supposed to keep running and indicate time and be of practical
and pleasant design. A clock factory is supposed to make clocks. It is supposed
to produce enough clocks cheaply enough that are good enough to be in demand
and to sell for enough to keep the place solvent. It consumes raw materials, repairs
and replaces its tools and equipment. It hires workmen and executives. It has
service firms and distributors. That is the sort of thing one means by ideal or
theoretical structure of the clock company and its organization.

Those are the rational points.

From the body of actual current today data on the clock company one spots
the outpoints for a DATA ANALYSIS.

One assigns the outpoints to the whole as a SITUATION ANALYSIS.

One uses his admin know-how and expertise to repair the most aberrated
subsection.

One gets a functioning clock factory that runs closer to the ideal.
Military, political and PR situations, etc., are handled all in the same way.
We call these two actions:

DATA ANALYSIS

SITUATION ANALYSIS.

19
DEFINITIONS

SITUATION —The broad general scene on which a body of current data
exists.

DATA—Facts, graphs, statements, decisions, actions, descriptions, which are
supposedly true.

OUTPOINT— Any one datum that is offered as true that is in fact found to
be illogical when compared to the 5 primary points of illogic.

PLUSPOINT—A datum of truth when found to be true compared to the 5
points.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

20
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 15 MAY 1970

Remimeo Issue []

Data Series 5

INFORMATION COLLECTION

It is a point of mystery how some obtain their information. One can only
guess at how they do it and looking at results wonder if it is actually done at all.

Obtaining information is necessary for any analysis of data.

If one obtains and analyzes some information he can get a hint of what in-
formation he should obtain in what area. By obtaining more data on that area, he
can have enough to actively handle.

Thus how one obtains information becomes a very important subject.

Nations have whole mobs of reporters sent out by newspapers, radio, TV and
magazines to collect information. Politicians go jaunting around collecting informa-
tion. Whole spy networks are maintained at huge expense to obtain information.

The Japanese in the first third of the 20th century had two maxims: “Anyone
can spy.” “Everyone must spy.” The Germans picked this up. They had their
whole populations at it. The Russian KGB numbers hundreds of thousands. CIA
spends billions. MI6 well, you get the idea.

It is not amiss, however, to point out that those 2 nations that devoted the most
effort to espionage (Japan and Germany) were BOTH DEFEATED HORRIBLY.

Thus the QUANTITY of data poured in is not any guarantee of understanding.

Newspapers today are usually devoted to propaganda, not news. Politicians
are striving to figure out another nation’s evil intentions, not to comprehend it.

The basic treatise on data collection and handling used to found the US
intelligence data system (‘Strategic Intelligence’) would make one laugh—
or cry.

All these elaborate (and expensive) systems of collecting information are not
only useless, they are deluding. They get people in plenty of trouble.

A copy of Time magazine (US) analyzed for outpoints runs so many out-
points per page when analyzed that one wonders how any publication so irrational
could continue solvent. And what do you know! It is going broke!

Those countries that spend the most on espionage are in the most trouble.

21
They weren’t in trouble and then began to spend money. They began to spy and
then got into trouble!

News media and intelligence actions are not themselves bad. But irrational
news media and illogical intelligence activity are psychotic.

So information collection can become a vice. It can be overdone.

If one had every org in a network fill out a thousand reports a week, he
would not obtain much information but he sure would knock them out of comm.

There is a moderate flow of information through any network so long as it is
within the capability of the comm lines and the personnel.

Thus we get a rule about collecting data in administrative structures.

NORMAL ADMIN FLOWS CONTAIN ENOUGH DATA TO DO A DATA
AND SITUATION ANALYSIS.

And

THE LESS DATA YOU HAVE THE MORE PRECISE YOUR ANALYSIS
MUST BE.

And

INDICATORS MUST BE WATCHED FOR IN ORDER TO UNDERTAKE
A SITUATION ANALYSIS.

And

A SITUATION ANALYSIS ONLY INDICATES THE AREA THAT HAS
TO BE CLOSELY INSPECTED AND HANDLED.

Thus, what is an “indicator?”

An indicator is a visible manifestation which tells one a situation analysis
should be done.

An indicator is the little flag sticking out that shows there is a possible
situation underneath that needs attention.

Some indicators about orgs or its sections would be—dirty or not reporting
or going insolvent or complaint letters or any nonoptimum datum that departs
from the ideal.

This is enough to engage in a data and situation analysis of the scene where
the indicator appeared.

The correct sequence, then, Is:
1. Have a normal information flow available.

2. Observe.

22
When a bad indicator is seen, become very alert.
Do a data analysis.

Do a situation analysis.

a uw FY

Obtain more data by direct inspection of the area indicated by the situ-
ation analysis.

7. Handle.

An incorrect sequence, bound to get one in deep trouble, is:
A. See an indicator.

B. Act to handle.

This even applies to emergencies IF ONE IS FAST ENOUGH TO DO THE
WHOLE CORRECT CYCLE IN A SPLIT SECOND.

Oddly enough anyone working in a familiar area CAN do it all in a split
second.

People that can do it like lightning are known to have “fast reaction time.”
People who can’t do it fast are often injured or dead.

Example of an emergency cycle: Engineer on duty, normal but experienced
perception. Is observing his area. Hears a hiss that shouldn’t be. Scans the area

and sees nothing out of order but a small white cloud. Combines sight and hear-
ing. Moves forward to get a better look. Sees valve has broken. Shuts off steam line.

Example of an incorrect action. Hears hiss. Pours water on the boiler fires.

ADMIN CYCLE

When you slow this down to an admin cycle it becomes very easy. It follows
the same steps.

It is not so dramatic. It could string out over months unless one realized that
the steps 1 to 7 should be taken when the first signs show up. It need not. How-
ever, it sometimes does.

Sometimes it has to be done over and over, full cycle, to get a full scene
purring.

Sometimes the “handle” requires steps which the area is too broken down to
get into effect and so becomes “Handle as possible and remember to do the
whole cycle again soon.”

Sometimes “handle” is a program of months or years duration, its only lia-
bility that it will be forgotten or thrown out before done by some “new broom.”

DATA COLLECTION

But it all begins with having a normal flow of information available and

23
OBSERVING. Seeing a bad indicator, one becomes alert and fully or quickly
finishes off the cycle.

BAD INDICATOR
What is a “‘bad indicator’’ really?
It is merely an outpoint taken from the 5 primary outpoints.

It is not “bad news” or “entheta” or a rumor. The “bad news” could easily
be a falsehood and is an outpoint because it is false bad news!

“Good” news when it is a falsehood is an outpoint!

RELIABLE SOURCE

Intelligence services are always talking “‘reliable sources.” Or about “con-
firmed observation.”

These are not very valuable ways of telling what is true. The master double
spy Philby who as a head MI6 adviser was a Russian spy. Yet for 30 years he
determined “reliable sources” for the US and England!

If three people tell you the same thing, it is not necessarily a fact as they
might all have heard the same lie. Three liars don’t make one fact—they make
three outpoints.

So it would seem to be very difficult to establish facts if leading papers and
intelligence services can’t do it!

Yes, it is tough to know the truth.

But the moment you begin to work with them, it is rather easy to locate
outpoints.

You are looking for outpoints. When they are analyzed and the situation is
analyzed by them, you then find yourself looking at the truth if you follow the
cycle (1) to (7).

It’s really rather magical.

If you know thoroughly what the 5 primary outpoints are, they leap into
view from any body of data.

Oscar says he leads a happy married life. His wife is usually seen crying.
It’s an outpoint—a falsehood.

The Omaha office is reported by Los Angeles to be doing great. It fails to
report. The LA datum does not include that it is 6 months old. Three outpoints,
one for time, one for falsehood, one for omitted datum.

Once you are fully familiar with the 5 primary outpoints, they are very obvious.

24
“We are having pie for supper” and “We have no flour” at least shows out
of sequence!

It is odd but all the ‘“‘facts” you protest in life and ridicule or growl about are
all one or another of the outpoints.

When you spot them for what they are, then you can actually estimate things.
And the pluspoints come into view.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

25
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 17 MAY 1970R
Remimeo REVISED 16 SEPTEMBER 1978

Data Series 6R

DATA SYSTEMS

Two bad systems are in current use on data.

The first is “reliable source.” In this system a report is considered true or
factual only if the source is well thought of. This is a sort of authority system.
Most professionals working with data collection use this. Who said it? If he is
considered reliable or an authority the data is considered true or factual. Sources
are graded from A to D. A is highest, D lowest. The frailty of this system is at
once apparent. Philby, as a high British intelligence official, was a Russian spy
for 30 years. Any data he gave the UK or US was “true” because he was a
“reliable source.” He had every Western agent who was being sent into communist
areas “fingered” and shot. The West became convinced you could not enter or
overthrow communist-held areas and stopped trying! Philby was the top authority!
He fooled CIA and MI6 for years!

Psychiatrists are “authorities” on the mind. Yet insanity and criminality
soar. They are the “reliable sources” on the mind.

Need I say more?

The other system in use is multiple report. If a report is heard from several
areas or people it is “true.”” The Russian KGB has a Department D that forges
documents and plants them in several parts of the world. They are then “true.”

Propaganda spokesmen located all over the world say the same thing to the
press on every major occasion. This becomes “public opinion” in government
circles and so is “true” because it is published and comes from so many areas.

Five informants could all have heard the same lie.
Thus we see these two systems of evaluation are both birdbrain.
TWO PROBLEMS
The two problems that information collection agencies have are:
1. Data evaluation
and
2. How to locate the areas they should closely investigate.

For (1) data evaluation they use primarily reliable source and multiple report.

26
EVERY ITEM RECEIVED THAT IS NOT “RELIABLE” OR “MULTIPLE”
IS WASTEBASKETED.

They throw out all outpoints and do not report them!
Their agents are thoroughly trained to do this.

As for (2) areas to investigate, they cannot pinpoint where they should inves-
tigate or even what to investigate because they do not use their outpoints.

Using outpoints and data and situation analysis they would know exactly
where to look at, at what.

ERRORS

The above data errors are practiced by the largest data collection agencies on
the planet—the “professionals.”’ These advise their governments! And are the
only advisers of their governments. Thus you can see how dangerous they are to
their own countries.

Naturally they have agents who have what is called “flair.” These, despite all
systems, apply logic. They are so few that Eisenhower’s intelligence adviser,
General Strong, said in his book that they are too scarce so one is better off with
a vast organization.

These agencies are jammed with false reports and false estimations.

An event contemporary with this writing where the US invaded Cambodia
shows several data and situation errors. Yet the Viet Cong HQ were using com-
puters. Yet their HQ was wiped out. The US president used CIA data which does
not include, by law, data on the US. So the info on which the US president was
acting was 5O percent missing! He was only told about the enemy evidently.
When he ordered the invasion the US blew up!

A rather big outpoint (omitted facts) don’t you think?

FAULTS

The reason I am using intelligence examples is because these are the biggest
human data collection “professionals” in the world.

The collection and use of data to estimate situations to guide national actions
and the data collection by a housewife going shopping are based on the same
principles.

Mrs. Glutz, told by a “reliable source,” Nellie Jones, that things are cheaper
at Finkleberries and told by enough TV admen she should buy KLEANO tends
to do just that. Yet Blastonsteins is really cheaper and by shaving up laundry soap
and boiling it she can have ten dollars worth of KLEANO for about fifty cents.

Errors in national data collection give us war and high taxes and for Mrs.
Glutz gives her a busted budget and stew all week.

So at top and bottom, any operation requires a grasp of data evaluation and
situation estimation.

27
Those who do it well win and those who don’t, go up in a cloud of atomic
particles or divorce papers!

Logic and illogic are the stuff of survive and succumb.

There are those who wish to survive.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

28
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 18 MAY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 7

FAMILIARITY

If one has no familiarity with how a scene (area) ought to be, one cannot
easily spot outpoints (illogical data) in it.

This is what also could be called an IDEAL scene or situation. If one
doesn’t know the ideal scene or situation then one is not likely to observe
nonideal points in it.

Let us send a farmer to sea. In a mild blow, with yards and booms creaking
and water hitting the hull, he is sure the ship is about to sink. He has no famil-
iarity with how it should sound or look so he misses any real outpoints and may
consider all pluspoints as outpoints.

Yet on a calm and pretty day he sees a freighter come within 500 feet of the
side and go full astern and thinks everything is great.

An experienced officer may attempt madly to avoid collision and all the
farmer would think was that the officer was being impolite! The farmer, lacking
any familiarity with the sea and having no ideal as to what smooth running
would be, would rarely see real outpoints unless he drowned. Yet an experienced
sailor, familiar with the scene in all its changing faces sees an outpoint in all
small illogicals.

On the other hand, the sailor on the farm would completely miss rust in the
wheat and an open gate and see no outpoints in a farm that the farmer knew was
about to go bust.

The rule is:

A PERSON MUST HAVE AN IDEAL SCENE WITH WHICH TO COM-
PARE THE EXISTING SCENE.

If a staff hasn’t got an idea of how a real org should run, then it misses
obvious outpoints.

One sees examples of this when an experienced org man visiting the org
tries to point out to a green staff (which has no ideal or familiarity) what is out.
The green staff grudgingly fixes up what he says to do but lets go of it the
moment he departs. Lacking familiarity and an ideal of a perfect org, the green
staff just doesn’t see anything wrong or anything right either!

29
The consequences of this are themselves illogical. One sees an untrained
executive shooting all the producers and letting the bad hats alone. His erroneous
ideal would be a quiet org, let us say. So he shoots anyone who is noisy or
demanding. He ignores statistics. He ignores the things he should watch merely
because he has a faulty ideal and no familiarity of a proper scene.

OBSERVATION ERRORS

When the scene is not familiar one has to look hard to become aware of
things. You’ve noticed tourists doing this. Yet the old resident “sees” far more
than they do while walking straight ahead down the road.

It is easy to confuse the novel with the “important fact.” “It was a warm day
for winter” is a useful fact only when it turns out that actually everything froze
up on that day or it indicated some other outpoint.

Most errors in observation are made because one has no ideal for the scene
or no familiarity with it.

However there are other error sources.

“Being reasonable” is the chief offender. People dub in a missing piece of a
sequence, for instance, instead of seeing that it IS missing. A false datum is
imagined to exist because a sequence is wrong or has a missing step.

It is horrifying to behold how easily people buy dub-in. This is because an
illogical sequence is uncomfortable. To relieve the discomfort they distort their
own observation by not-ising the outpoint and concluding something else.

I recall once seeing a Tammany Hall group (a New York political bunch
whose symbol is a tiger) stop before the tiger’s cage in a zoo. The cage was
empty and they were much disappointed. ] was there and said to them, “The
tiger is out to lunch.” They told those on the outer edge of the group, “The tiger
is out to lunch.” They all cheered up, accepted the empty cage and went very

happily on their way. Not one said “Lunch?” Or “Who are you?” Or laughed at
the joke. Even though it was sunset! I pitied the government of New York!

ACCURATE OBSERVATION
There are certain conditions necessary for accurate observation.

First is a means of PERCEPTION whether by remote communication by var-
ious comm lines or by direct looking, feeling, experiencing.

Second is an IDEAL of how the scene or area should be.

Third is FAMILIARITY with how such scenes are when things are going
well or poorly.

Fourth is understanding PLUSPOINTS or rightnesses when present.
Fifth is knowing OUTPOINTS (all 5 types) when they appear.
Sixth is rapid ability to ANALYZE DATA.

30
Seventh is the ability to ANALYZE the SITUATION.
Eighth is the willingness to INSPECT more closely the area of outness.

Then one has to have the knowledge and imagination necessary to
HANDLE.

One could call the above the CYCLE OF OBSERVATION. If one calls
HANDLE number 9 it would be the Cycle of Control.

If one is trained to conceive all variations of outpoints (illogics) and studies

up to conceive an ideal and gains familiarity with the scene or type of area, his
ability to observe and handle things would be considered almost supernatural.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

31
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 MAY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 8

SANITY

An observer has to be sane to sanely observe.

This has been so far out in the society that the word “sane” itself has come
to mean “conservative” or “cautious.”” Or something you can agree with. The
19th-century psychologist decided he could not define “normal” and there
weren’t any normal people. The 14th-century psychiatrist is the 20th-century
“authority” on sanity. Yet an examination of such shows them to be unable to
demonstrate it personally or bring it about, much less define it.

Dictionaries say it is “health, soundness of body or mind; levelheadedness,
reasonableness.”

Yet sanity is vital to accurate observation.

FIXED IDEAS
The “‘idée fixe” is the bug in sanity.

Whenever an observer himself has fixed ideas he tends to look at them, not
at the information.

Prejudiced people are suffering mainly from an “‘idée fixe.”

The strange part of it is that the “idée fixe” they think they have isn’t the
one they do have.

An example of this is the social “scientist” with a favorite theory. I have
seen tons of these birds pushing a theory as though it was the last theory in the
world and valuable as a ten-pound diamond. Such throw away any fact that does
not agree with theory. That’s how 19th-century psychology went off the rails. All
fixed ideas and no facts.

The physical sciences in Hegel’s time did the same thing. There was no 8th
planet in the solar system, even when found in a telescope, because “‘seven is a
perfect number so there can only be seven planets.”

History is full of idiocies—and idiots—with fixed ideas. They cannot observe
beyond the idea.

A fixed idea is something accepted without personal inspection or agree-
ment. It is the perfect “authority knows best.” It is the “reliable source.” A

32
typical one was the intelligence report accepted by the whole US Navy right up to
7 Dec. 1941, the date of destruction of the US fleet by Jap planes. The pre-Pear]
Harbor report, from unimpeachably reliable sources was “the Japanese cannot
fly—they have no sense of balance.” The report overlooked that the Japs were
the world’s greatest acrobats! It became a fixed idea that caused the neglect of all
other reports.

A fixed idea is uninspected. It blocks the existence of any contrary observation.

Most reactionaries (people resisting all progress or action) are suffering
from fixed ideas which they received from “authorities,” which no actual experience
alters.

That British red-coated infantry never took cover was another one. It took a
score or two of wars and fantastic loss of life to finally break it down. If any
single fixed idea destroyed the British Empire, this one is a candidate.

NORMAL SCENE

The reason a fixed idea can get so rooted and so overlooked is that it appears
normal or reasonable.

And somebody or a lot of somebodies want to believe it.

Thus a fixed idea can become an ideal. It is probably a wrong ideal. Inca-
pable Jap pilots would be a wish for a navy. It would be wonderful! Red-coated
infantry were supposed to be brave and unflinching.

In both cases the ideal is irrational.
A rational ideal has this law:

THE PURPOSE OF THE ACTIVITY MUST BE PART OF THE IDEAL
ONE HAS FOR THAT ACTIVITY.

A navy that has an ideal that the enemy can’t fly is stupidly avoiding its own
purpose which is to fight.

British infantry had the purpose of winning wars, not just looking brave.

Thus one can analyze for a sane ideal by simply asking, ““What’s the pur-
pose of the activity?” If the ideal is one that forwards the purpose, it will pass
for sane.

There are many factors which add up to an ideal scene. If the majority of
these forward the purpose of the activity, it can be said to be a sane ideal.

If an ideal which does not forward the activity in any way is the ideal being
stressed then a fixed idea is present and had better be inspected.

This could be said to be a very harsh utilitarian view of things. But it is not.
The artistic plays its role in any ideal. Morale has its part in any ideal.

An ideal studio for an artist could be very beautiful or very ugly so long as
it served him to produce his art. If it was very beautiful yet hindered his artistic
activities it would be a very crazy ideal scene.

33
A handsome factory that produced would be a high ideal. But its nearness
to raw materials, transport and worker housing are the more important factors in
an ideal of a factory. And its location in a country where the government made
an atmosphere in which production could occur could be an overriding part of an
“ideal scene.”

You have to look at what the area is for before you can say whether it is ideal
or not.

And if its area is too limited to produce or too expensive for it to be solvent,
then it isn’t a sane scene.

URGES TO IMPROVE

Sometimes the urge to improve an activity is such that it injures or destroys
the activity.

If one is familiar with the type of activity he must also realize that there is a
law involved.

THE FACT THAT SOMETHING IS ACTUALLY OPERATING AND
SOLVENT CAN OUTWEIGH THE UNTESTED ADVANTAGES OF CHANG-
ING IT.

In other words, an ideal scene might be vastly different but the actual scene
IS operating.

So the factor of OBSESSIVE CHANGE enters. Change can destroy with
ferocity.

Whole areas of London, jammed with small but customer-filled shops, have
been swept away to make room for chromium high-rent modern stores which
stand empty of buyers.

Birmingham, where you could get anything made, had all its tiny craft shops
swept away and replaced with high-rent huge new buildings all on some progress-
crazy psychotic break.

Possibly the new stores and the huge new shops fitted somebody’s “ideal”
but they did not match an actual operating environment.

It is this difference between an ideal scene and a practical scene which
brings down many old businesses and civilizations.

Therefore, to have an ideal, familiarity with what works is desirable.

It is quite possible without any familiarity, to imagine a successful ideal.
BUT IT MUST NOT HAVE ANY FIXED IDEAS IN IT.

It is the fixed idea that knocks a practical operating living environment in
the head.

Do-gooders are always at this. They see in a row of old shacks, not eco-
nomic independence and a lazy life but P-O-V-E-R-T-Y. So they get a new housing
project built, shoot taxes into the sky, put total control on a lot of people and cave in
a society.

34
The do-gooder is pushing the 19th-century fixed idea of the Comte de Saint-
Simon—to gear the whole economy down to the poorest man in it. In other
words to reward only the downstat. Everyone becomes a slave of course but it
sure sounds good.

Newspapermen are probably the world’s worst observers. They observe
through the fixed ideas of the publisher or the prevailing control group. Their
stories are given them before they leave the office. Yet their observations advise
the public and the government!

The outpoints to be found in any contemporary newspaper brand most sto-
ries as false before one proceeds more than a paragraph.

Yet this is what the world public is expected to run on.

Naturally it distorts the scene toward raving insanity. This conflicts with the
native logic of people so the public thinks the world a lot madder than it really is.

In two cities all newspapers were suspended from publication for quite a
period. In both, crime dropped to zero! And resumed again when newspapers
were again published.

The ideal scene of the citizen in his workaday world is vastly different than
the scene depicted in a newspaper.

The difference between the two can make one feel quite weird.

Thus there should not be too wide a difference between the ideal and the repre-
sented scene. And not too wide a difference between the ideal and the actual scene.

R (reality) consists of the isness of things. One can improve upon this isness
to bring about an ideal and lead the R up to it. This is normal improvement and
is accepted as sane.

One can also degrade the R by dropping the representation (description)
of the scene well below the actual. In the black propaganda work traditionally
carried on by many governments this latter trick of corrupting the R is the means
used to foment internal revolt and war.

Both actions of upgrade and downgrade are outpoints when reported as
facts. ““‘We made £1000 in reserves this week” is as crazily outpoint as “the
government went broke this week” when either one is not the truth.

When the report says, “We should plan a higher income,” it is leading to a

higher ideal and is not an outpoint mainly because it is not representing any fact
but a hopeful and ambitious management.

5 POINTS
When none of the outpoints are present, yet you do have reports and the

scene is functioning and fulfilling its purpose one would have what he could call
a sane scene.

35
If all 5 points were absent yet the scene was not functioning well enough to
live, it would be such a departure from the idea! that that itself would be outpoint
in that importance was altered. What is out here is the whole situation! The
situation analysis would be instantly visible.

But in practice this last happens only in theory, not in practice. A collapsing
situation is forecast by outpoints in its data.

Organisms and organizations tend to survive.

A decline of survival is attended also by outpoints.

SANITY IS SURVIVAL

Anything not only survives better when sane but it is true that the insane
doesn’t survive.

Thus survival potential can be measured to a considerable degree by the
absence of outpoints.

This does not mean that sane men can’t be shot or sane organizations can’t
be destroyed. It means only that there is far less chance of them being shot or
destroyed.

So long as men and organizations are connected to insane men and organi-
zations, wild things can and do happen unexpectedly.

But usually such things can be predicted by outpoints in others.

When sane men and organizations exist in a broad scene that is convulsed
with irrationality, it takes very keen observation and a good grip on logic and
fast action to stay alive. This is known as “environmental challenge.” It can be
overdone! Too much challenge can overwhelm.

The difference between such happening to a sane man or organization and to
the insane would be that the failure did not itself become a fixed idea.

INSANITY

The 5 primary illogics or outpoints as we call them are of course the anatomy
of insanity.

In their many variations the insanity of any scene can be sounded and the
nucleus of it located.

By locating and then closely inspecting, such a point of insanity can then be
handled.

When you know what insanity really is you can then confront it and handle
it. One is not driven into a huge generality of “everything is insane.”

By detecting and eliminating small insane areas, taking care not to destroy

the sane things around it, one can gradually lift any situation up to sanity and
survival.

36
By seeing what is insane in a scene and seeing why it is insane, one has by
comparison also found what is sane.

By locating and understanding outpoints one finds the pluspoints for any
given situation.

And that is often quite a relief.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

37
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 23 MAY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 9

ERRORS

Many who begin to use “illogics,” who have not drilled on them so they can
rattle them off, choose errors instead of outpoints.

An error may show something else. It is nothing in itself.
An error obscures or alters a datum.

Example: Asking someone to spot the outpoints in a Russian passenger vacation
cruise liner in a foreign port, the answers were, “The hammer and sickle are
upside down.” “The courtesy flag is not flying right side up.” These aren’t out-
points. The hammer and sickle weren’t backwards so saying it was was an outpoint.
The actual outpoint was passenger vacation cruise liner. There is no Russian idle
class. It was too big to be giving cruises to winning tractor drivers. Russian and
vacation cruise liner just don’t go together. Either the reports of Russian refusal
to let Russians travel is false or it wasn’t a vacation cruise liner but it was. Hence
it’s an outpoint. An omitted datum. Two contrary data means one is false. In-
vestigation disclosed it was Russian all right and a vacation cruise liner all right.
BUT IT WAS CHARTERED TO AN ITALIAN COMPANY THAT SOLD
CRUISES TO ITALIANS!

But this leads to a new outpoint. How come the workers’ paradise is building
huge ships for capitalist pleasures?

If anyone like a Martian was tracing down what’s out on this planet, this one
outpoint would lead to others.

A situation analysis would indicate an investigation of Russia where out-
points abound and the Martian would know a lot of what’s wrong on the planet.

In doing so he would find a lot of capitalistic outpoints which would lead
him to investigate the so-called West and he would have the basic “cold war” of
communism versus capitalism.

This would lead him into new data the two have in common (economics) and
a data analysis of economics would discover the screwiest bunch on the planet,
the international banker playing off both sides.

He would have analyzed the planet.

Given that he knew or could translate languages, it might take him a week,
starting with a Russian luxury cruise liner, to run down the planetary bad spot.

38
Now if he reversed his investigation and used PLUSPOINTS he would arrive
with a situation analysis of what group would be strong enough to handle the
down spot and by investigation possibly pinpoint what could tip over the bad
spot.

If he just used “errors” he would get no place.

The ideal he would have to be working from would be a planet at peace
where individuals could go about their affairs and be happy without threats of
immediate arrest or destruction. It would be a very simple ideal as it would be
based only on how planetary populations and cultures survive and that is already
laid down in an earlier rule in this series.

Ask somebody to look at a table used for meals at the end of a meal and
indicate any outpoints. Usually he’ll point out a dirty plate or crumbs or an ash-
tray not emptied. They are not outpoints. When people finish eating one expects
dirty plates, crumbs and full ashtrays. If none of these things were present there
might be several outpoints to note. The end of a meal with table and plates all
clean would be a reversed sequence. That would be an outpoint. Evidently the
dinner has been omitted and that would be quite an outpoint! Obviously no meal
has been served so there’s a falsehood. So here are three outpoints!

It is best to get what outpoints are down pat. One does this first by thinking
up examples and then by observing some body of data and then by looking at
various scenes.

It will be found that outpoints are really few unless the activity is very irra-
tional.

Simple errors on the other hand can be found in legions in any scene.

Child’s games often include, ““What’s wrong with this picture?’”’ Usually
they are just errors like a road sign upside down. But if you had a brown rabbit in
winter holding down a man with its front paws and a caption, “Japanese parasols
attack ,” you’d have some real outpoints.

A lot of people would try to figure it out and supply new outpoints (being
reasonable). A learned professor could point out the symbolism. Some would
laugh it off. Some would be annoyed by it. And the reason anybody would do
anything about it is that it is sort of painful to confront the irrational so instead of
seeing its isness of illogics an effort is made to make it logical or to throw it
away.

The reason misunderstood words or typographical errors were not regarded
as a barrier to study was that people converted them or not-ised them. In actual
fact a word one does not understand makes a missing datum. Reasonableness or
nonconfront enter in and one drops the book.

Errors do not count in pluspoints either.
That a factory has a few errors is no real indicator. A factory has pluspoints

to the degree it attains its ideal and fulfills its purpose. That some of its machin-
ery needs repair might not even be an outpoint. If the general machinery of the

39
place is good for enough years to easily work off its replacement value there is a
pluspoint.

People applying fixed or wrong ideals to scene are only pointing up errors in
their own ideals, not those of the scene!

A reformer who had a strict Dutch mother looks at a primitive Indian set-
tlement and sees children playing in mud and adults going about unclothed. He
forces them to live cleanly and cuts off the sun by putting them in clothes—they
lose their immunities required to live and die off. He missed the pluspoint that
these Indians had survived hundreds of years in this area that would kill a white
man in a year!

Thus errors are usually a comparison to one’s personal ideals. Outpoints
compare to the ideal for that particular scene.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

40
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 23 JUNE 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 10

THE MISSING SCENE

The biggest “omitted data” would be the whole scene.

A person who does not know how the scene should be can thereafter miss
most of the outpoints in it.

An example is the continual rewrite of the International Code (signaling by
flags between ships) by some “convention” composed of clerks who have never
gone to sea. Not knowing the scene, the International Code of Signals now con-
tains ‘““How are your kidneys?” but nothing about lifeboats.

College education became rather discredited in Europe until students were
required to work in areas of actual practice as part of their studies. Educated far
from reality students had “no scene.” Thus no data they had was related by them
to an actual activity. There was even an era when the “practical man” or “prac-
tical engineer” was held in contempt. That was when the present culture started
to go down.

On the other hand one of the most long-lived activities around is the wine
industry of Portugal. It has almost no theory trained. It is total scene. Every job
in it is by apprenticeship for years. It is very constant and very successful.

A good blend would be theory and practical in balance. That gives one data
and activity. But it could be improved by stressing also the ideal scene.

BODIES OF DATA
Data classifies in similar connections or similar locations.

A body of data is associated by the subject to which it is applicable or by the
geographical area to which it belongs.

A body of data can also be grouped as to time, like an historical period.

Illogic occurs when one or more data is misplaced into the wrong body of
data for it.

An example would be “Los Angeles smog was growing worse so we fined
New York.” That is pretty obviously a misplace.

“Cars were no longer in use. Bacterial warfare had taken its toll.”

4]
“T am sorry madam but you cannot travel first class on a third class passport.”

Humanoid response to such displacements is to be reasonable. A new false
datum is dreamed up and put into the body of data to explain why that datum is
included. (Reasonableness is often inserted as explanation of other outpoints
also.)

In the smog one, it could be dreamed up that New York’s exports or imports
were causing LA smog.

In the car one, it could be imagined that bacteriological warfare had wiped
out all the people.

In the train one, it could be inserted that in that country passports were used
instead of tickets.

The brain strains to correctly classify data into its own zones and is very
rejective or imaginative when it is not.

Intelligence tests accidentally use this one very often.

It remains that an outpoint can occur when a datum belonging to one zone of
data, location or time, is inserted into another zone where it doesn’t.

Algebra is sometimes hard to learn for some because NUMBERS are in-
vaded by LETTERS. 2x = 10. X is of course 5. But part of a new student’s
mind says letters are letters and make words.

Primitive rejective responses to foreigners is a mental reaction to a body of
people, in this case, being invaded by a person not of that tribe.

If the scene is wholly unknown, one doesn’t know what data belongs to it.
Thus a sense of confusion results. Recruits can be sent for ruddy rods for rifles
and apprentice painters can be ordered to get cans of sky blue lampblack.

A sense of humor is in part an ability to spot outpoints that should be re-
jected from a body of data. In fact a sense of humor is based on both rejection
and absurd outpoints of all types.

Reasonable people accept displacements with an amazing tranquility by
imagining connecting links or assuming they do not know the ideal scene. A
reasonable person would accept a pig in a parlor by imagining that there was a
good reason for it. And leave the pig in the parlor and revise their own ideal
scene!

Yet pigs belong to a body of data including barns, pens, farms, animals. And
parlors belong to a body of data including teacups, knickknacks, conversation
and humans.

Possibly Professor Wundt who “discovered” in 1879 that humans were ani-

mals had seen too many pigs in parlors! And based the whole of “psychology”
on a confusion of bodies of data!

42
Murder in a hospital, as done by psychiatry, would be a confusion of bodies
of actions. Actions belong to their own bodies of data.

One drives a car, rides a horse. One doesn’t ride a car but one can drive a
horse. But the action, the motions involved with, driving a horse are very differ-
ent than those used in driving a car. This is a language breakdown called a
‘“homonym.” One word means two different things. Japanese is an easy language
except for its use of the same word for several different things. Two Japanese
talking commonly have to draw Chinese characters (Japanese is written with
Chinese characters) to each other to unravel what they mean. They are in a per-
petual struggle to pry apart bodies of data.

“1234 Red 789 P 987 Green 432 Apple” as a statement would probably tie
up CIA code breakers for weeks as they would know it was a code. The same
statement would tie up a football coach as he would know it was a team play. A
mathematician would know it fitted into some other activity than his. Hardly any-
one would classify it as a totally meaningless series of symbols.

So there is a reverse compulsion—to try to fit any datum found into some
body of data.

The mind operates toward logic, particularly in classes of things.

The sensible handling of data of course includes spotting a datum, terminal,
item, action, grouped in with a body of data wrong for it. And in spotting that a
datum does not have to belong anywhere at all.

Included in mental abilities is putting similar data into one type of action,
items or data. Car parts, traffic rules, communications, are each a body of data
in which one can fit similar data.

When a person has some idea of the scene involved, he should be able to
separate the data in it into similar groups.

An org board is an example of this. Sections are broad classes of action or
items into which one can fit the related data. Departments are a broader body of
related data, actions, items. Divisions are even broader but still cover related
classes of data. The whole org is a very broad class of data, determined in part
by the type of product being made.

If a person has trouble relating data to its proper body of data (if he were
unaware or “reasonable”) he would have an awful lot of trouble finding his way
around an org or routing despatches or getting things or wearing his own hat.

Orders are a broad class of data. Orders from proper sources is a narrower
body of data. If a person cannot tell the difference he will follow anyone’s or-
ders. And that will snarl him up most thoroughly.

I once knew a carpenter so obliging and so unable to classify orders that he
built knickknacks, cabinets, shelves, for any staff member who asked and wasted
all the time and materials and orders from his boss that were to have built a
house! The house materials and money and the carpenter’s time and pay were all
expended without anything of value to show for it! Not only was he unable to

43
relate orders to their own classes but also couldn’t relate materials and plans to a
house!

In most miscarriages of projects it will be found that someone on the line
cannot relate data or actions to their own classes. Along with this goes other
illogics.

So the ability to spot illogics in a known scene can directly relate to effi-
ciency and even to success and survival.

A switch intended for a house put into an airplane electrical system cuts out
at 30,000 feet due to the wrong metal to withstand cold and there goes the air-
plane. A part from one class of parts is included wrongly in another class of parts.

So there is an INCORRECTLY INCLUDED DATUM which is a companion
to the OMITTED DATUM as an outpoint.

This most commonly occurs when, in the mind, the scene itself is missing
and the first thing needed to classify data (scene) is not there.

An example is camera storage by someone who has no idea of types of
cameras. Instead of classifying all the needful bits of a certain view camera in
one box, one inevitably gets the lens hoods of all cameras jumbled into one
box marked “lens hoods.” To assemble or use the view camera one spends
hours trying to find its parts in boxes neatly labeled ‘“‘camera backs,” “lenses,”
“tripods,” etc.

Here, when the scene of what a set up view camera looks like and operates
like, is missing, one gets a closer identification of data than exists. Lens hoods
are lens hoods. Tripods are tripods. Thus a wrong system of classification occurs
out of scene ignorance.

A traveler unable to distinguish one uniform from another “solves” it by
classifying all uniforms as “porters.”” Hands his bag to an arrogant police
captain and that’s how he spent his vacation, in jail.

Lack of the scene brings about too tight an identification of one thing with
another. This can also exclude a vital bit making a disassociation.

A newly called-up army lieutenant passes right on by an enemy spy dressed
as one of his own soldiers. An experienced sergeant right behind him claps the
spy in jail accurately because “he wasn’t wearing “is ’at the way we do in the
Fusileers!”

Times change data classification. In 1920 anyone with a camera near a
seaport was a spy. In 1960 anyone not carrying a camera couldn’t be a tourist so
was watched!

So the scene for one cultural period is not the scene for another.

Thus a class of data for a given time belongs broadly or narrowly to itself.

44
Including a datum in it or from another time or excluding a datum from it, or
forcing a datum to have a class can in any combination produce an illogical
situation.

Some knowledge of the scene itself is vital to an accurate and logical assem-
bly or review of data.

The scene therefore, knowledge of, is the basic “omitted data.”

The remedy of course is to get more data on what the scene itself really
should consist of. When the scene is missing one has to study what the scene is
supposed to consist of, just not more random data about it.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

45
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 30 JUNE 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 11

THE SITUATION

Probably the hardest meaning to get across is the definition of “SITUATION.”

One can say variously, “Isolate the actual situation” or “Work out what the
situation is’”’ and get the most remarkable results.

To some, a despatch is a situation. A small error to others is a situation.

Yet, if one wishes to know and use data and logic, one must know exactly
what is meant in this logic series by SITUATION.

English has several meanings for the one word. In the dictionary it’s a
“place,” a “state or condition of affairs,” “a momentous combination of circum-
stances,” “a clash of passions or personalities,” or “‘a job.” One gets the feeling
that people are fumbling around for a meaning they know must be there.

For our purposes we had better give an exact definition of what is meant by
SITUATION. If we are going to do a situation analysis by doing an analysis of
data, then WHAT is a situation?

We can therefore specifically define for our purposes in logic the word
SITUATION.

A SITUATION IS A MAJOR DEPARTURE FROM THE IDEAL SCENE.
This means a wide and significant or dangerous or potentially damaging

CIRCUMSTANCE or STATE OF AFFAIRS which means that the IDEAL
SCENE has been departed from and doesn’t fully exist in that area.

THE IDEAL SCENE

One has to work out or know what the ideal scene would be for an organi-
zation or department or social strata or an activity to know that a wide big flaw
existed in it.

To be somewhat overly illustrative about it, let us take a town that has no one
living in it.

One would have to figure out what was the ideal scene of a town. Any town.
It would be a place where people lived, worked, ate, slept, survived. It could be

46
pretty or historical or well designed or quaint. Each of these would possibly add
purpose or color to the town.

BUT this town in question has NO people living in it.
That is a departure from the ideal scene of towns.

Therefore THE SITUATION would be NO PEOPLE LIVE IN THIS
“TOWN.”

Data analysis would lead us to this by noting outpoints.

6 P.M. — No smoke from house chimneys. (omitted item)
9 p.M. — No lights. (omitted item)

Dawn — No dogs. (omitted terminals)

1910 election poster. (wrong time)

That would be enough. We would then realize that a SITUATION existed
because data analysis is also done against the ideal scene.

We would know enough about it to look more closely.

No people! That’s the SITUATION.

HANDLING

Thus, if one were responsible for the area one would now know what to
handle.

How he handled it depends upon (a) the need, (b) availability of resources,
and (c) capability.

Obviously, if it’s supposed to have people in it and if one needs a town there
one would have to get a bright idea or a dozen and eventually get people to live
there. How fast it could be done depends on the availability of resources—those
there or what one has (even as little resource as a voice, paper, pen, comm lines).

One’s own capability to get ideas or work or the capabilities of people are a
major factor in handling.

But so far as the SITUATION is concerned, it exists whether it is handled
or not.

HOW TO FIND A SITUATION

When you are called upon to find out if there IS a situation (as an inspector
or official or soldier or cat or king, whatever) you can follow these steps and
arrive with what the situation is every time.

1. Observe.
2. Notice an oddity of any kind or none.

3. Establish what the ideal scene would be for what is observed.

47
4. Count the outpoints now visible.
5. Following up the outpoints, observe more closely.
6. Establish even more simply what the ideal scene would be.

7. The situation will be THE MOST MAJOR DEPARTURE FROM THE
IDEAL SCENE.

HANDLING

Just as you proceed to the MOST MAJOR SITUATION—go big, when it
comes to handling it usually occurs that reverse is true—go small!

It is seldom you can handle it all at one bang. (Of course that happens too.)
But just because the SITUATION is big is no real reason the solution must be.
Solutions work on gradient scales. Little by more by more.

When you really see a SITUATION, it is often so big and so appalling one
can feel incapable.

The need to handle comes first.
The resources available come next.
The capability comes third.

Estimate these and, by getting a very bright workable (often very simple)
idea, one can make a start.

An activity can get so wide of the ideal scene the people in it are just in a
confusion. They do all sorts of odd irrelevant things, often hurt the activity
further.

Follow the steps given 1-7 above and you will have grasped the SITUATION.
You will then be able to do (a), (b), (c).

That begins to make things come right.

In that way most situations can be both defined and handled.

INTERFERENCE
Lots of people, often with lots of authority, get mired into situations. They
do not know they are in anything that could be defined, isolated or stated. They
bat madly at unimportant dust motes or each other and just mire in more deeply.
Whole civilizations uniformly go the route just that way.

So do orgs, important activities and individuals.

One can handle exactly as above, if one practices up so he can really do the
drill on life.

48
The only danger is that the situation can be so far from any ideal that others
with fixed ideas and madness can defy the most accurate and sensible solutions.

But that’s part of the situation, isn’t it?

Data analysis is done to make a more direct observation of exactly the right
area possible. One can then establish the exact SITUATION.

It’s a piece of freedom to be able to do this.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

49
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 5 JULY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 12

HOW TO FIND AND ESTABLISH AN IDEAL SCENE

In order to detect, handle or remedy situations one has to be able to under-
stand and work out several things.

These are defining the ideal scene itself, detect without error or guess any
departure on it, find out WHY a departure occurred and work out a means of
reverting back to the ideal scene.

In order to resolve a situation fully one has to get the real reason WHY a
departure from the ideal scene occurred.

“What was changed?” or ““What changed?”’ is the same question.

That “change” is the root of departures comes from a series of plant experi-
ments I conducted. (The type of experimentation was undertaken to study cellular
life behavior and reaction to see if it was a different type of life—it isn’t. The
experiments themselves were later repeated in various universities and were the
subject of much press for them over the world.)

In setting up conditions of growth I observed that plants on various occasions
greatly declined suddenly. In each case I was able to trace the last major CHANGE
that had occurred and correct it. Changes made in temperature, water volume,
humidity, ventilation, greatly affected the plants in terms of wilt, decreased
growth rate, increase in parasites, etc.

When THE change was isolated and the condition reverted to that occurring
during the previous healthy period, a recovery would occur.

At first glance this may seem obvious. Yet in actual practice it was not easy
to do.

Gardeners’ records would omit vital data or alter importance or drop out
time, etc. A gardener might seek to cover up for himself or a fellow worker. He
tended to make himself right and would enter falsehoods or reassurance that was
a falsehood into the analysis.

A new gardener would seem to affect the plants greatly and one could build
a personality influence theory on this—until one found that, being untrained in
the procedure used, he would enter even more outpoints than usual.

At such a juncture one would of course train the gardener. BUT that didn’t
locate WHAT had been changed. And one had to locate that to get the plants to

50
recover. The conditions in use were extreme forcing conditions anyway and lapse
of duty was very apparent. Sixteen-foot hothouse American corn from seeds usu-
ally furnishing 5-foot stocks, 43 tomatoes to the truss where 5 is more usual
were the demands being met. So any change showed up at once.

The fact of change itself was a vital point as well. One discovery was that
life does best in a near-optimum constancy— meaning that change just as change
is usually harmful to plant life.

The fact of isolating change in the environment as the sole harmful cause
was one discovery.

That one had to isolate THE change in order to obtain full recovery was
another discovery.

Change itself was not bad but in this experimental series conditions were set
as optimum and the beneficial changes had already been made with remarkable
results. Thus one was observing change from the optimum.

This would be the same thing as “departures from the ideal scene.”
The action was always:

1. Observe the decline.

Locate the exact change which had been made.

Revert THE change.

- YN

A return to the near-ideal scene would occur if one were maintaining the
ideal scene meanwhile.

THE IDEAL SCENE
There are two scenes:
A. The ideal scene.
B. The existing scene.
These of course can be wide apart.
How does one know the ideal scene?

At first thought it would be very difficult for a person not an expert to know
the ideal scene.

For years certain “authoritarian” people in the field of mental healing
fought with lies and great guile to obscure the fact that the ideal scene in mental
healing can be known to anyone. Such imprisoned and tortured and murdered
human beings with the excuse that they themselves were the only experts. “It
takes 12 years to make a psychiatrist.” “Expert skill is required to kill a patient.”

The existing scene these “experts” made was a slaughterhouse for asylums
and the insanity and crime statistics soaring.

They fought like maniacs to obscure the ideal scene and hired and coerced

SI
” e

an army of agents, “reporters,” “officials” and such to smash anyone who
sought to present the ideal scene or ways to attain it. Indeed it was a world gone
mad with even the police and governments hoodwinked by these “experts.”

Yet any citizen knew the ideal scene had he not been so propaganda-
frightened by the existing scene.

By constantly pounding in the “naturalness” of an existing scene consisting
of madness, crime, torture, seizure and murder, these mad “experts” PUT THE
IDEAL SCENE SO FAR FROM REACH THAT IT APPEARED INCREDIBLE.
It was so bad a situation that anyone proposing the ideal scene was actively
resisted!

Yet the ideal scene is so easy to state that any citizen could have stated it at
any time. And often believed it was occurring!

The ideal scene of an asylum would be people recovering in a calm atmosphere,
restored to any previous ability, emerging competent and confident.

The ideal scene in the society would be, probably, a safe environment
wherein one could happily make his way through life.

Of course, the technology of the mind was the missing data. But the experts
in charge of that sector of life paid out hard cash to hoods to prevent any such
technology developing—a matter fully documented.

The gap between the ideal scene and the existing scene can be very wide
and in any endeavor elements exist that tend to prevent a total closure between
the two.

However, approached on a gradient with skill and determination, it can be
done.

DEPARTURE

The mental awareness that something is wrong with a scene is the point at
which one can begin reverting to the ideal scene.

Without this awareness on the part of a GROUP then an individual can be
much impeded in handling a situation.

The mental processes of the person seeking to improve things toward an
ideal scene or change them back to an ideal scene must include those who are
also parts of the scene.

Seeing something wrong without seeking to correct it degenerates into mere
faultfinding and natter. This is about as far as many people go. That something,
real or imagined, is wrong with the scene is a not uncommon state of mind. Not
knowing what’s intended or being done, or the limitations of resource or the
magnitude and complexity of opposition, the armchair critic can be dreadfully
unreal. He therefore tends to be suppressed, particularly by reactionaries (who
try to keep it all as it is regardless).

Unfortunately, the continual battle of life then is between the critic and the

52
reactionary. As this often blows up in pointless destruction, it can be seen there
could be something wrong with both of them.

Particularly the inactive, carping critic is at fault on three counts:
A. He isn’t doing anything about it.
B. He is not conceiving or broadcasting a real ideal scene.

C. He is not providing any gradient approach to actually attain an ideal
scene.

The reactionary of course simply resists any change regardless of who is
suffering, providing the reactionary can retain what position and possession he
may have.

A revolutionary of course usually:

1. Is doing something about it even if violent.

2. Is conceiving and broadcasting his version of the ideal scene.

And

3. Is planning and acting upon some means of bringing about his own
ideal scene.

History and “progress”? seem to be the revolutionary making his version of
progress over the dead bodies of reactionaries.

And although it may be history and “progress” the cycle is usually intensely
destructive and ends up without attaining an ideal scene and also destroying any
scene existing.

The ancient world is filled with ruins over which one can wander in contem-
plative and philosophic reverie. These attempts to make and maintain an ideal
scene certainly left enough bruised masonry around.

So it is really not enough to natter and it’s rather too much to thrust violent
change down on the heads of one and all including the objectors.

Violent revolution comes about when the actual ideal scene has not been
properly stated and when it excludes significant parts of the group.

It’s no good having a revolution if the end product will be a FURTHER
departure from the ideal scene.

The pastoral nonsense of Jean Jacques Rousseau was about as wide from an
ideal scene as you could get, and it and other efforts, also wide, brought on the
French Revolution.

The Russian 1917 revolution had already been preceded by the democratic
Kerensky revolt. But it failed because Russia, being Russia, was about a century
and a half late.

Also the French Revolution was late.

53
And in both cases those who should have led didn’t. Lesser ranks overthrew
command.

These and countless other human upheavals mark the fluttering pages of
history and history will be written in similar vein again and again to eternity
unless some sense and logic gets into the scene.

Revolt is only an expression of too-long-unmended departures from the ideal
scene of society.

Usually the stitches taken to mend the growing social order are too weak and
too hastily improvised to prevent the cultural fabric from being torn to rags.

Street battles and angry infantry are the direct opposite of the ideal political
scene.

What was needed in such a case was an awareness of departure from the
ideal scene, the discovery of WHY a departure occurred and a gradient, real and
determined program to return the scene closer to the ideal.

The elements of improved mechanical arts and progress in the humanities
may be utilized to effect the recovery. In any event (which is missed by the
reactionary and his “good old days”), cultures do change and those changes are
a part of any new ideal scene. So one does not achieve a reversion to the ideal
by turning back the clock. One must be bright enough to include improvements in
a new ideal scene.

IDEAL SCENE AND PURPOSE

Let us look this over, this concept of the ideal scene, and see that it is not a
very complex thing. One doesn’t have to be much of an expert to see what an
ideal scene would be.

The complex parts of the whole may not make up the whole, but they are not
really vital to conceiving an ideal scene for any activity, as small as a family or
as big as a planet.

The entire concept of an ideal scene for any activity is really a clean state-
ment of its PURPOSE.

All one has to ask is ““What’s the purpose of this?”’ and one will be able to
work out what the ideal scene of “this” is.

To give a pedestrian example let us take a shoe shop. Its purpose is obvi-
ously to sell or provide people with shoes. The ideal scene is almost as simple as
“This activity sells or provides people with shoes.”

Now, no matter how complex may be the business or economics of shoe
sales, the fact remains that that is almost the ideal scene.

Only one factor is now missing: TIME.

The complete ideal scene of the shoe shop is then, “This activity is intended
to provide people with shoes for (time).” It can be always or for its owner’s

54
lifetime or for the duration of the owner’s stay in the town or the duration of the
state fair.

Now we can see departures from the ideal scene of this shoe store.

One has to work out fairly correctly what the purpose of an activity is and
how long it is to endure before one can make a statement of the ideal scene.

From this one can work out the complexities which compose the activity in
order to establish it in the first place including the speed of the gradient (how
much shoe store how fast) and also how to spot the fact of departure from the
ideal scene.

This process would also work on any portion of the shoe store if the main
ideal is not also violated. The children’s department, the cashier, the stock clerk
also have their subideal scenes. And departures from their ideal scenes can be
noted. It doesn’t matter what the activity is, large or small, romantic or hum-
drum, its ideal scene and its subideal scenes are arrived at in the same way.

METHODS OF AWARENESS

Statistics are the only sound measure of any production or any job or any
activity.

The moment that one goes into any dependence on opinion, he goes into
quicksand and will see too late, the fatal flaw in restoring anything.

If the fact that anything can be given production statistics seems too far out,
it is visible that even a guard, who would at first glance seem to be producing
nothing but giving only security, is actually producing minutes, hours, weeks,
years, of continued production TIME.

Probably the most thoughtful exercise is not conceiving the ideal scene but
working out what the production statistic of it is. For here, the activity or subac-
tivity must be very correctly staticized to exactly measure the ideal scene of any
activity or the statistic will itself bring about a departure!

Just as the purpose from which the ideal scene is taken must be correct, so
must the statistic be all the more thoughtfully correct.

As an example, if the ideal scene of the shoe store is given the total statistic
of its income then three things can happen:

1. It may cease to provide people with shoes that persuade them to come
back for more.

2. It may sell shoes without enough profit to cover overhead and cease to
exist.

3. It may conduct itself with more interest in the cashier than the customer
and lose its trade.

Probably its statistic is “percentage of citizens in the area profitably shod by
this store.”

55
Working out how long it takes to wear out an average pair of shoes, any
ex-customer would be retired from the percentage after that timespan had elapsed
from buying his last pair.

Given a fairly accurate and realistically updated census figure, that statistic
would probably tell the tale of the ideal scene, which has its element of contin-
uance.

The sole fixation on making money can depart from the scene. Abandon-
ment of making any money would certainly cause a departure of the shoe store.

A commando battalion would have just as serious an examination for its
ideal scene and statistic as a shoe store! And it would give a very, very effective
activity if fully worked out. You’d really have to work out, probably better than
the generals who think they have, the real purpose of a commando battalion
(which is probably “‘to disperse enemy preparations by unexpected actions and
overinvolve enemy manpower in expensive guarding”). The statistic could be
something like “our individual soldiers freed from opponents” and/or “‘casualties
not occurring by reason of interrupted enemy preparations.”

In effect the commando battalion would be “producing.” The result would
be an effective increase in men under arms for their own side.

WHY

Knowing, then, the ideal scene and its statistic, one, by keeping the statistic,
can notice without “reasonableness” or somebody’s report or some fifth-column
propaganda, an immediate departure from the ideal scene.

Remember, violent change only becomes seemingly vital when the departure
from the ideal scene is noticed too late.

Opinion, reports, subject to outpoints as they almost always are, seldom tell
one more than somebody else’s prejudices or his efforts to cover or failures to
observe.

Now that a departure is seen (because the statistic drops) one can quickly go
about noticing when and so get at WHY.

When he has the WHY of the departure he can proceed to handle it.

The statistic, guarded against false reports and verified, is a clean statement
not as subject to outpoints as other types of statements.

Whole activities have been smashed by not having a statistic of success but
taking an opinion of trouble, and reversely, by having a statistic indicating disas-
ter but a broadcast opinion of “great success.’ Probably the latter is the more
frequent.

It is not possible to locate WHY the departure soon enough to remedy unless
one takes the most reliable datum available—which is the datum most easily kept
clean of outpoints— which is a statistic.

You don’t really even know there is a Why unless there has been a departure.
And the departure may be very hard to spot without a statistic.

56
I have seen a group producing like mad, doing totally great, but which had
no statistic, become the subject of wild outpoints and even contempt within itself.

If an activity lacks an ideal scene and a correct statistic for it, it has no
stable datum with which to rebuff opinion and outpoints. To that extent the group
goes a bit mad.

Group sanity depends, then, upon an ideal scene, correct subideal scenes
and statistics to match.

One of the calmest, safest groups around had a bad reputation with fellow
groups because it did not have or make known its ideal scene and did not have or
release its statistics.

And it had a hard time of it for quite a while, meantime working exhaustedly
but dedicatedly.

Planet, nation, social groups, businesses, all their parts and the individual

have their ideal scene and their statistic, their departures and successes and failures.
And none fall outside these data.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

57
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 6 JULY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 13

IRRATIONALITY

Any and all irrationality is connected to departures from an ideal scene.
Therefore outpoints indicate departures.

It must follow then that rationality is connected to an ideal scene.
These three assumptions should be studied, observed and fully grasped.

They are very adventurous assumptions at first glance for if they are true
then one has not only the definition of sanity in an organization or individual but
also of neurosis and psychosis. One also sees that organizations or social groups
or companies or any third dynamic (the urge to survival as a group) activity can
be neurotic or psychotic.

It therefore would follow that the technology of the ideal scene, existing
scene, departures, outpoints and statistics would contain or indicate the means of
establishing sane groups or individuals or measuring their relative sanity or re-
establishing relative sanity in them.

THE PLAGUE OF MAN

Man has been harassed by irrationality in individual and group conduct since
there has been man.

The existing scene of man’s activities is so immersed in departures and out-
points that at first survey there would seem to be no possible handling of the
situation,

Most people have accepted the existing conditions as “inevitable” and toss
them off with a “that’s life.”

This is of course an overwhelmed attitude.

And it is true that the departure from any ideal is so distant as to obscure
any feeling of reality about possibly achieving an ideal scene even in a limited
area.

Philosophies exist to “prove” that chaos is needful to furnish challenge. That
is like saying “Be glad you’re crazy” (as 19th century psychologists did say). Or
“Suffering refines one,” as the playwrights of the early 20th century so fondly
used in their plots.

58
One whole religious order preached the necessity to accept man as he 1s.

Thus man is plagued with defeatism, has lacked technology, and civilization
after civilization has succumbed, either in a flash of flame and war or in the slow
erosion of grinding distress.

Most men, it has been said, live lives of quiet desperation.

One doesn’t have to live through several wars to learn that man and his
leaders are something less than sane.

Every sword-waving conqueror has exploited man’s seeming inability to
avoid brotherly slaughter and no conqueror or army seems to have noticed that
wars only rarely shift boundaries no matter how many are killed. Europe for
centuries has excelled in the development of marble orchards and failed remark-
ably to establish any lasting political scene at all.

In other lands government leaders, who should have at least a partial duty of
preserving their citizenry have sat raptly listening to the advice of madmen for
some centuries now. US leaders lately have taken to acting on the mental health
guidance of many civilian committees, each one of which contains at least one
member of an organization directly connected to Russia! The country most inter-
ested in fomenting US civil commotion! A former head of CIA once cracked for
a joke, ‘What if there were a Russian KGB agent inside CIA?” The shudder of
horror that went through US politicians was interesting to see. Yet every new
employee of CIA was “vetted’’ before employment by members of two organiza-
tions connected to Russia! The “American” Psychological Association and the
“American” Psychiatric Association are directed by the World Federation of
Mental Health founded by Brock Chisholm, the companion of Alger Hiss and
Whittaker Chambers, the famous US communist traitors. And the US govern-
ment pays the WFMH to hold congresses which are attended by Russian KGB
delegates. And all intelligence given the president on Vietnam, where the US was
“fighting communism” was passed through the hands of a man whose parents
are both Russian-born communists. And the US Defense Department intelligence
on the same war was led and “coordinated” by another communist-connected
employee.

With that many outpoints showing up in their social welfare and intelligence
scene, the US government seems something less than bright in wondering,
“What riots?” ““Why drugs?” “Why defeats?”

The statistics of the US welfare and social scene under the domination of the
World Federation of Mental Health are soaring insanity, crime and riot graphs. It
is so bad that Russia will never have to fight an atomic war. The US economic,
political and social scene will deteriorate and is deteriorating so rapidly that the
US will have lost any will to fight or any economic or social power to resist
Russia.

(In case you wonder as to the factualness of data given above, it is all docu-
mented. )

I have given this existing scene so that you can see the outpoints. The

deteriorated state of public safety in the US is well known. The fantastic sums it
spends are well known.

59
I have given visible outpoints.

One glance at psychiatric and psychological statistics (which are all negative)
would tell any sane person that they must be doing something else as they were
given all the money, political power and authority ever needed to handle the
scene. But it got worse! So, checking the scene for outpoints, one finds them
directly connected to the No. 1 US enemy. Their data is marvelous for outpoints.
Paid to serve the US, their literature discusses mainly abolishing boundaries and
the Constitution.

The US official, so drowned in the chatter and confusion of double talk and
false intelligence and situation reports, apparently cannot see any solution. And
heaps money on his traitors and finances their avid destruction of the country.

Yet, outpoints are so many and so visible that even the citizen sees them
while the official remains apparently numb and inactive.

Very well, man can and does get drowned in his own irrationality. And his
civilizations rise and fall.

Man’s primary plague is irrationality. He is not in the grip of a “death
wish,” nor is he having a love affair with destruction. He has just lacked any
road out or the technology to put him on it.

RESOLVING THE SCENE

All the US would have to do is count up the outpoints, look at the statistics,
drop their passionate affair with Russian psychiatry, conceive an ideal scene of a
productive America, rechannel welfare monies into decent public works to give
people jobs and improve productivity per capita, knock off foreign funds and
wars, give the money to increasing the value of American resources and even
now the US would become all right. National production would catch up with
destructive inflation, money would return to value and an ideal national scene
would be approached. Even the military-industrial clique would be happy making
bulldozers instead of tanks and youth would have a future in sight instead of a
foreign-made grave. The odd part of it is, even the Senate and House would vote
for such a program as their own statistic today is how much federal money can
they bring home to their own states.

The only ones that would resist are the people who are the ones causing the
above outpoints and who knowingly or unknowingly serve other masters than the
US. And that’s a simple security problem after all.

I have put the example on a large canvas just to show that the steps of
handling departures are the same for all situations large or great.

When done this way, by the steps mentioned in the Data Series, big situations
can be analyzed as well as little ones.

Available resources and all that play a part in getting the solution into effect.
But the cost in time and action of the original effort to introduce the cycle of
revertment to an ideal scene is not anywhere near as costly as letting the depar-
ture continue.

60
The EASIER thing to do in all cases is to work out the ideal scene, survey
the existing scene for outpoints, work out statistics that should exist, find out
WHY the departure, program a gradient solution back to the ideal, settle the
practical aspects of it and go about it.

LOSING ONE’S WAY
One’s direction is lost to the degree one fails to work out the ideal scene.

It is so easy to toss off an “ideal scene” that is not the ideal scene that one
can begin with a false premise.

As he tries to work with an incorrect “ideal scene” for an activity he may
fail and grow discouraged without recognizing that he is already working with an
omitted datum—the real ideal scene for that activity.

This is a major reason one can lose one’s way in handling a situation.

Also in trying to find a WHY of departure one may refuse to admit that
something he himself did was the reason for the departure—or why the ideal
scene never took place. It requires quite a bit of character to recognize one’s own
errors; it is much easier to find them in a neighbor. Thus one may choose the
wrong WHY, for this and other reasons.

Failures to examine the scene, reasonableness which causes blindness to the
obvious, errors of penetration and defensive reasons not to admit it all impede a
proper analysis.

The existing scene may be missing in one’s view because one doesn’t really
look at it or because one has no correct ideal scene for it.

Many would rather blame or justify than be honest. Others would rather criticize
than work.

But this all adds up to outpoints in the examination itself.

If one keeps at it one will however arrive at the right answers with regard to
any scene.

BUILDING THE IDEAL SCENE

To suppose one can instantly hit upon an ideal scene for any activity without
further test is to be very fond of one’s own prejudices.

There is however a test of whether you have the ideal scene or not.

Can you Staticize it?

Strangely, but inevitably, since we live in the physical universe where there is
both time and association of beings with beings and the physical universe and the
physical universe with itself, there is a production-consumption factor in all

living.

61
There seems to be a ratio between producing and consuming, and establish-
ing it would probably resolve that strange subject, economics, as well as social
welfare and other things.

It seems to be fatal to consume without producing. Many social observations
teach us this.

Evidently one cannot, at the physical universe level, produce without con-
suming. And it seems that it is destructive to produce only and consume too
little. One can produce far more than one consumes, apparently, but cannot con-
sume far more than one produces.

This seems to be true of groups.

Some dreamers puffing on a hash pipe of unreality believe one can really
be happy producing nothing and consuming everything. The idyllic ideal of a
paradise where no one produces has been tried.

In interviewing secretaries in New York I found the larger percentage had
the personal ideal scene of “marrying a millionaire.” Aside from there not being
that many millionaires, the dream of idle luxury forever was so far from any
possible ideal scene that it was busy ruining their lives and giving their current
male escorts a life of critical hell. One, having married a boy who was fast on
the road to becoming a millionaire, was so dissatisfied with him not being one
right now that she ruined his life and hers.

In short, it sounds nice, but having met a few who did marry millionaires, |
can attest that they were either not producing and failing as beings or were work-
ing themselves half to death.

These no-production dreams, like the harp in heaven, lead at best to suicidal
boredom. Yet Madison Avenue’s ads would have one believe that one and all
should own all manner of cloth, wood and metal just to be alive.

A whole civilization can break down, flop, on propaganda of no-production,
total consumption. The sweat that flies off a “workers” paradise” would rival the
Mississippi!

There is some sort of balanced ratio and it favors apparently, for pride and
life and happiness, higher production of something than consumption. When it
gets too unbalanced in values, something seems to happen.

The unhappiness and tumult in current society is oddly current with the
Keynesian economic theory of creating want. It’s a silly theory and has lately
become to be abandoned. But it was in vogue forty years or more, as I recall. It
produced the “welfare era” of the psychiatrist and the total slavery of the tax-
payer!

So, whatever the economics of it, an ideal scene apparently has to have a
statistic or the whole thing caves in, either from lack of continuity in time, from
disinterest, or from plain lack of supply.

Death is possibly, could be in part, a cessation of interested production.

62
Hard pressed, a living being dreams of some free time. Give him too much
and he begins to crave action and will go into production and if blocked from
doing so will tend to cave in. Loss of a job depresses people way out of propor-
tion and subsequent declines often trace back to it.

Destructive activities carry their own self-death. The state of veterans after
wars is not always traced to wounds or privation. Destructive acts put a brand on

aman.

Some of this is answered by the absence of production.

IDEAL SCENE AND STAT
Whatever the facts and economic rules may be about production and the
ideal scene, it would seem to be the case, sufficient at least for our purposes, that
this rule holds good:

THE CORRECTLY STATED IDEAL SCENE WILL HAVE A
PRODUCTION STATISTIC.

The way one defines “production” in this is not necessarily so many things
made on an assembly line. That’s an easy one.

It isn’t just pairs of shoes. Production can be defined as the regulation or
safeguarding of it, the planning or the designing of it, a lot, lot, lot of things.

A stat is a positive numerical thing that can be accurately counted and
graphed on a two-dimensional thing.

To test the correctness of an ideal scene, one should be able to assign it a
correct Statistic.

If one can’t figure out a statistic for it, then it probably is an incorrectly
stated ideal scene and will suffer from departures.

Wrong stats assigned the ideal scene will wreck it. A wrongly conceived
ideal scene will derail the activity quickly.

To understand something it is necessary to have a datum of comparable mag-
nitude. To understand logic one needs to be able to establish what is illogic. One
then has two things for comparison.

The ideal scene can be compared to an existing scene. This is one way to
establish the ideal scene. But both need a factor to keep them in reality.

To test the ideal scene for correctness one needs to be able to formulate its
Statistic.

The exercise of testing the statement of the ideal scene, to keep it real and
not airy-fairy and unattainable, is to work out a realistic stat for it.

One can go back and forth between the statistic and the stated ideal scene,

63
adjusting one, then the other until one gets an attainable statistic that really does
measure the validity of the stated ideal scene.

A statistic is a tight reality, a stable point, which is to measure any departure
from the ideal scene.

In setting a statistic one has to outguess all efforts to falsify it (predict
possible outpoints in collecting it) and has to see if following the statistic would
mislead anyone from the ideal scene.

So let’s walk back to the shoe store.

Test statement of ideal scene: to make money.

Test statistic: pairs of shoes sold.

Now if you tried to marry up those two you’d get a prompt catastrophe. The
potential departure would be immediate.

We sell shoes at no profit to raise the stat, we make no money. We try only
to make money, we sell cheap shoes at high cost and our customers don’t come
back and we don’t make money.

So those two are both no good.

Departure would occur, indeed it already exists right in the badly worked-out
ideal scene and the stat.

Test ideal scene: cobblers are entitled to the shoes they make.

Test statistic: how many shoes cobbler makes.

So that’s loopy!

Test ideal scene: all citizens furnished with shoes.

Test statistic: number of shoes given away.

Well, that’s bonkers for a shoe store in any economic setup. The citizens for
sure would have no shoes once the shoe store was empty, for if everything is
given away, who'd raise cows for hides or drive nails in soles unless he had a gun
held on him so what worker’s paradise is this? Slave state for sure. So that’s no
ideal scene for a shoe store no matter how “ideal” it looks to a do-gooder. Too
airy-fairy. Since no shoes would exist to be given away.

Test ideal scene: shoes for any worker who has coupons.

Test statistic: number of coupons collected.

Well, maybe. In some society. But can the shoe store get shoes for the coupons?
Maybe if there’s enough economic police.

But then this would have to be a monopoly shoe store and the quality would
not be a factor.

64
So this must be an army quartermaster depot or a state monopoly. If no
incentive were needed it would work. Sure would be hard on the corns but it
would barely work. Rather insecure though.

But this is a shoe store where people buy.

Test ideal scene: to provide workers with good shoes that can be replaced
from suppliers.

Test statistic: ??? Number of shoes from suppliers given to workers...
Happy workers . . . ??? Amount of control that can be exerted on suppliers. . .
22? Ah. Number of shoes supplied well-shod workers.

Okay, that’s a QM depot. Now what’s a shoe store?
And we probably get what was given in an earlier example:

Ideal scene: to provide people with shoes and continue in business for owner’s
lifetime.

Statistic: percentage of citizens in area profitably shod by this store.

But even this would need to be played back and forth. And if this shoe store
was in a socialist country both might require amendment. And if it was in a
beach resort thronged with tourists who were also mostly foreigners the ideal
scene and statistic would suffer an immediate departure and the store would fail,

crash if the ideal scene were not correctly stated and the statistic real. The class
of tourist would have a bearing on it.

Maybe the state has currency control demands on shopkeepers and requires
them to get in foreign currency or no new stock!

Thus you could get:

Ideal scene: engendering acquisitiveness for novelty footwear made in this
country.

Statistic: pairs of gift shoes bought by foreigners.
That sure would shift the whole atmosphere of the store!
Thus one plays the ideal scene against the statistic.

Maybe one can’t find any ideal scene for the activity and no statistic of any
significance to anyone. Could be that the activity is totally worthless even to
oneself as a hobby. Although this opens the door to cynicism or a lazy way of not
doing anything about anything, it just could be. Even a “reporter”? who writes
nothing could have an ideal scene and statistic. But it would have to be really real
even then. Like,

Ideal scene: unsuspected as a spy while accepted as a “reporter.”
Statistic: cash collected for reports undetectedly delivered to my government.

If that seems unreal as a scene the staff of Time magazine recently held a

65
mass meeting protesting the use of Time credentials for government spying.
“Nobody will talk to us anymore,” the staff of that dying WFMH mouthpiece
wept.

So anything could have an ideal scene, even a police state.

Idealism has nothing to do with it.

VIABLE

The word “viable” means capable of living, able to live in a particular
climate or atmosphere.

Life over a period of time requires VIABILITY, or the ability to survive.

Any organism or any group or any part of a group must have a potential of
survival. It must be viable —life-able.

This is true of any ideal scene. The statistic measures directly the relative
survival potential of the organism or its part.

This tells you the plain fact that life contains the essential purpose of living,
no matter how many misguided philosophers or generals may decree otherwise.

The planetary population is now not fully viable since weapons exist capable
of making it a billiard ball at the whim of some madman.

The potential survival of the whole is of course an influence and limitation
on its parts.

Men who live “only for self’ don’t live.

An organism or group can live a dangerous life in that it risks its survival.
But its own inefficiency is more of a threat than its enemies if it does not know
or adjust its ideal scene.

A military company, told on posters the ideal scene is all brag in the bar
with girls on each arm, who find in fact that their actual scene is military police
outside every bar with clubs and a real short life under the orders of a sadistically
disinterested and inexpert government, is presented with an instantly visible
departure.

The government believed such posters were needful to get recruits and did
not realize that a truthfully stated scene and an effort to promote survival to
commanders would also have recruited and conscription needn’t be resorted to as
the end product of lies.

Men will become part of the most onerous and dangerous groups imaginable
providing the purpose is there and stated and they have a chance of survival.

The ideal scene of a nation worshipping death is that of a nation that will not
survive anyway. At least not as that nation.

A group or an organism must be viable. The state is relative to the time the
group needs to live to accomplish its purpose.

66
Each part of a group, in any ideal scene, should contribute viability to the
whole group.

Production of something is mandatory on any part of a group if the group is
to be fully viable.

Painting, writing, music, all have positive roles in a society. So productivity,
as is viability, can be seen as a very broad inclusive term.

The subpurposes of any group make up the subideal scene of its various
parts.

In other words each part of a broad group has its own ideal scene and its
own Statistic.

These combined bring about the broad group’s ideal scene.
The statistics each lead to viability of the part and then the whole group.

In reverse, with so many parts of a planet desirous of extinguishing so many
other parts, the viability of the planet becomes questionable.

In an organization each part has its own ideal scene and its own statistic on
up to the main ideal scene and the main statistic.

In practice one works back from the ideal scene of the group into its smallest
part, so that all lesser ideal scenes and lesser statistics mount up to and bring
about the main ideal scene and statistic.

Examining the lesser ideal scenes and statistics, one can find outpoints
first in how the whole thing is organized and then the main ideal scene and the
statistics and how the lesser ones bring it about.

Dominant is the viability of the whole. Where any part does not support
total viability it is an outpoint. Contributive is the viability of each part and
cohesive is the scheme in which the lesser ideal scenes and the lesser statistics
bring about the BIG ideal scene and the BIG statistic. If this does not occur the
nonsupportive lesser ideal scene or statistic is an outpoint.

Groups that falter have to have all this restudied. As departures did occur,
the organization itself, as part of any action, must be reexamined against expe-
rience and new greater and lesser ideal scenes and statistics must be worked out
for it and put into use.

Agreement of the group is a necessary ingredient as many reformers have
learned, often too late, and as many groups have seen, also generally too late.

The trick is to correct the ideal scene and statistic and all lesser ones of the
group while it is still alive.

After that one can have better dependence upon them and keep the statistics
up and the purpose going forward.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

67
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 7 JULY 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 14

WORKING AND MANAGING

By actual experience in working and managing in many activities, I can state
flatly that the most dangerous worker-manager thing to do is to work or manage
from something else than statistics.

Interpersonal relations with many strata of many societies in many lands
with many activities demonstrates plainly that man’s largest and most unjust fault
consists wholly of acting on opinion.

Opinions can be as varied as the weather in Washington, all on the same
subject. When one says “opinion,” one is dealing with that morass of false
reports and prejudices which make up the chaos of current social orders.

Some seek an answer in status. “If one has STATUS, one is safe” is about
as frail as a house of cards. Ask some recently deposed dictator or yesterday’s
idol what his status was worth. Yet many work exclusively for status. In Spain it
is enough to have an executive degree. One doesn’t have to do any executiving.
Work at it? Caramba no!

In capitalisms it is enough to be an heir and in communisms it is only
necessary to be the son of a commissar. Work? Nyet!

Revolts are protests against idle status. Where are the kings of yesteryear?
Riding along on the last generation’s statistics is as fatal as a diet of thin air.

Undeserved status is a false statistic. Nothing is more bitterly resented, unless
it is a statistic earned without status by those who live by status alone!

William Stieber, the most skilled intelligence chief of the 19th century, who won
the Franco-Prussian war for Bismarck, was hated by German officers because he
was not a proper officer but a civilian!

When German officers took over German intelligence, they lost two wars in
a row and the caste is very unlamentedly dead.

So long as “character” can be reviled, so long as “opinion” is used, so long
as governments run on rumors and false reports, the social scene will continue to
be a mess.

You will not believe it but governments think newspaper stories are “public
opinion.” One US president was astounded to be given a wildly enthusiastic

68
public reception at an airport. The press had been hammering him for a year and
the poor fellow thought it was “public opinion.” Texts on public relations remark
this strange governmental fixation on believing the press.

That means all a nation’s enemies have to do is bribe or hire some underpaid
reporters or semibankrupt publishers, and voild/ it can steer the government any
way it wishes!

Do a survey on any personality or subject and the conflicts in opinion are
revealed as fantastic.

Seven witnesses to one street accident will even give seven conflicting accounts.

Thus this whole field of “opinion” and “reports” is a quicksand endanger-
ing both personal repute and management skill.

It is so bad that wars and revolutions stem directly from the use of opinion
and the neglect of statistics.

In a chaos it is necessary to set up one point or terminal which is stable
before one can really decide anything much less get anything done.

A statistic is such a stable point. One can proceed from it and use it to the
degree that it is a correct statistic.

One can detect, then, when things start to go wrong well before they crash.
Using opinion or random rumors or reports, one can go very wrong indeed.
In fact, using these without knowing the statistics one can smash a life or crash a

group.

The US Navy operates on the social attainments and civilized behavior of
their people.

A naval officer is promoted on the basis of his amiability and the social skill
of his wife!

A clerk is promoted because he marries the boss’s daughter.
A governor is elected because he could play a guitar!
This is a whirlwind of chaos because of the falseness of the statistics used.

So the stat used is itself an outpoint in each case.
PREDICTION
Outpoints are more than useful in prediction.

The whole reason one does a data analysis and a situation analysis is to
predict.

The biggest outpoint would be a missing ideal scene, the next biggest would
be a correct statistic for it.

69
If these are missing, then prediction can become a matter of telling fortunes
with bamboo sticks.

One predicts in order to continue the viability of an organism, an individual,
a group, an organization, a state or nation or planet, or to estimate the future of
anything.

The more outpoints the less future.

A disaster could be said to be a totality of outpoints in final and sudden
culmination.

This gives one a return to chaos.

The closer one approaches a disaster the more outpoints will turn up. Thus
the more outpoints that turn up, the closer one is approaching a disaster.

When the outpoints are overwhelming, a condition of death is approached.

By being able to predict, the organism or individual or group can correct the
outpoints before disaster occurs.

Each sphere of activity has its own prediction.

A group of different activities with a common goal can be predicted by the
outpoints turning up in parts of the general activity.

In theory if all parts of a main group or organization had an ideal scene for
each, a statistic and an intense interest in maintaining the ideal scene and statistic
of each part, the survival would be infinite.

Any group or organism or individual is somewhat interdependent upon its
neighbors, on other groups and individuals. It cannot however put them right
unless it itself has reached some acceptable level of approach to its ideal scenes.

The conflict amongst organisms, individuals and groups does not necessarily
add up to “the survival of the fittest,” whatever that meant. It does however
mean that in such conflict the best chance of survival goes to the individual,
organism or group that best approaches and maintains its ideal scene, lesser ideal
scenes, statistic and lesser statistics.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

70
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 8 AUGUST 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 15

WRONG TARGET

There is an additional specific outpoint.
It is WRONG TARGET.

This means in effect AN INCORRECT SELECTION OF AN OBJECTIVE
TO ATTEMPT OR ATTACK.

Example: Josie Ann has been sitting in the house reading. Her brother Oscar
has been playing ball in the yard. A window breaks. Josie Ann’s mother rushes
into the room, sees Josie Ann and the ball on the floor, spanks Josie Ann.

This outpoint contains the element, amongst other things, of injustice.
There is another version of this:

Example: A firm has its premises flooded. The manager promptly insists on
buying fire insurance.

Example: The people of Yangville are starving due to food scarcity in the
land. The premier borrows 65 million pounds to build a new capital and palace.

Example: The government is under attack and riot and civil disorder spreads.
The government officials campaign to put down all “rightists” for trying to es-
tablish law and order.

Example: A man is beaten and robbed on the main street of a town. The
police demand to know why he was there and put him in jail for a long period of
investigation.

Example: The multibillion-dollar drug cartels push out 65 tons of habit-
forming hard drugs. A government campaigns against cigarettes.

Example: A boy wants to be an accountant. His family forces him to join the
army as a career.

It is noted that the very insane often attack anyone who seeks to help them.

This outpoint is very fundamental as an illogic and is very useful.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

71
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue I
Executive Hats
Ethics Hats

Data Series 16

INVESTIGATORY PROCEDURE

Correction of things which are not wrong and neglecting things which are
not right puts the tombstone on any org or civilization.

In auditing when one reviews or “corrects” a case that is running well, one
has trouble. It is made trouble.

Similarly on the third dynamic, correcting situations which do not exist and
neglecting situations which do exist can destroy a group.

All this boils down to CORRECT INVESTIGATION. It is not a slight skill.
It is THE basic skill behind any intelligent action.

SUPPRESSIVE JUSTICE
When justice goes astray (as it usually does) the things that have occurred are:

1. Use of justice for some other purpose than public safety (such as main-
taining a privileged group or indulging a fixed idea) or

2. Investigatory procedure.

All suppressive use of the forces of justice can be traced back to one or the
other of these.

Aberrations and hate very often find outlet by calling them “justice” or “law
and order.” This is why it can be said that man cannot be trusted with justice.

This or just plain stupidity bring about a neglect of intelligent investigatory
procedures. Yet all third dynamic sanity depends upon correct and unaberrated
investigatory procedures. Only in that way can one establish causes of things.
And only by establishing causes can one cease to be the effect of unwanted sit-
uations.

It is one thing to be able to observe. It is quite another to utilize observations
so that one can get to the basis of things.

SEQUENCES
Investigations become necessary in the face of outpoints or pluspoints.

72
Investigations can occur out of idle curiosity or particular interest. They can
also occur to locate the cause of pluspoints.

Whatever the motive for investigation, the action itself is conducted by se-
quences.

If one is incapable mentally of tracing a series of events or actions, one
cannot investigate.

Altered sequence is a primary block to investigation.

At first glance, omitted data would seem to be the block. On the contrary, it
is the end product of an investigation and is what pulls an investigation along—
one is looking for omitted data.

An altered sequence of actions defeats any investigation. Examples: We will
hang him and then conduct a trial. We will assume who did it and then find
evidence to prove it. A crime should be provoked to find who commits them.

Any time an investigation gets back-to-front, it will not succeed.

Thus, if an investigator himself has any trouble with seeing or visualizing
sequences of actions, he will inevitably come up with the wrong answer.

Reversely, when one sees that someone has come up with a wrong or incom-
plete answer, one can assume that the investigator has trouble with sequences of
events or, of course, did not really investigate.

One can’t really credit that Sherlock Holmes would say, “I have here the
fingerprint of Mr. Murgatroyd on the murder weapon. Have the police arrest
him. Now, Watson, hand me a magnifying glass and ask Sgt. Doherty to let us
look over his fingerprint files.”

If one cannot visualize a series of actions, like a ball bouncing down a flight
of stairs, or if one cannot relate in proper order several different actions with one
object into a proper sequence, he will not be able to investigate.

If one can, that’s fine.

But any drilling with attention-shifting drills will improve one’s ability to
visualize sequences. Why? Stuck attention or attention that cannot confront alike
will have trouble in visualizing sequences.

INVESTIGATIONS

In HCO Policy Letter 11 May 65, ETHICS OFFICER HAT; HCO Policy
Letter 1 Sept. 65 VII, ETHICS PROTECTION; HCO Policy Letter 1 Feb. 66 II,
INSPECTIONS BY EXECUTIVE SECRETARIES, HOW TO DO THEM, and
pages 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Manual of Justice; the subject of investigation as
applied to justice is given.

It will be noted that these are sequences of actions.

“(Editor's Note: the Manual of Justice was a manual written for HCO personnel in 1959. Most of the
data in it later appeared in the book Jntroduction to Scientology Ethics under “Ethics Codes” and in

policy letters from 1965-66 on Ethics Officer duties (see OEC Volume 1, section on Department of
Inspections and Reports).]

73
Neglect of these items or a failure to know and follow them led here and
there to suppressive uses of justice or to permitting orgs to be suppressed by
special interest groups in the society.

Indeed, had these been in and followed we would have had a great deal less
trouble than we did.

But investigation is not monopolized by law and order.

All betterment of life depends on finding out pluspoints and why and reen-
forcing them, locating outpoints and why and eradicating them.

This is the successful survival pattern of living. A primitive who is going to
survive does just that and a scientist who is worth anything does just that.

The fisherman sees seagulls clustering over a point on the sea. That’s the
beginning of a short sequence, point number |. He predicts a school of fish,
point number 2. He sails over as sequence point number 3. He looks down as
sequence point number 4. He sees fish as point number 5. He gets out a net as
point number 6. He circles the school with the net, number 7. He draws in the
net, number 8. He brings the fish on board, number 9. He goes to port, number
10. He sells the fish, number 11. That’s following a pluspoint—cluster of
seagulls.

A sequence from an outpoint might be: Housewife serves dinner. Nobody
eats the cake, number |; she tastes it, number 2; she recognizes soap in it, number 3.
She goes to kitchen, number 4. She looks into cupboard, number 5. She finds the
soapbox upset, number 6. She sees the flour below it, number 7. She sees cookie
jar empty, number 8. She grabs young son, number 9. She shows him the setup,
number 10. She gets a confession, number 11. And number 12 is too painful to
describe.

Unsuccessful investigators think good fish catches are sent by God and that
when cake tastes like soap it is fate. They live in unsuccessful worlds of deep
mystery.

They also hang the wrong people.

DISCOVERY

All discoveries are the end product of a sequence of investigatory actions that
begin with either a pluspoint or an outpoint.

Thus all knowledge proceeds from pluspoints or outpoints observed.
And all knowledge depends on an ability to investigate.

And all investigation is done in correct sequence.

And all successes depend upon the ability to do these things.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

74
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue II

Data Series 17

NARROWING THE TARGET

When you look at a broad field or area, it is quite overwhelming to have to
find a small sector that might be out.

The lazy and popular way is to generalize. ““They’re all confused.” ‘The
organization is rickety.” “They’re doing great.”

That’s all very well but it doesn’t get you much of anywhere.
The way to observe so as to find out what to observe is by discarding areas.

This in fact was the system I used to make the discoveries which became
Dianetics and Scientology.

It was obvious to me that it would take a few million years to examine all of
life to find out what made it what it was.

The first step was the tough one. I looked for a common denominator that
was true for all life forms. I found they were attempting to survive.

With this datum I outlined all areas of wisdom or knowledge and discarded
those which had not much assisted man to survive.

This threw away all but scientific methodology, so I used that for investiga-
tory procedure.

Then, working with that, found mental image pictures. And working with
them, found the human spirit as different from them.

By following up the workable, one arrived at the processing actions which, if
applied, work, resulting in the increase of ability and freedom.

By following up the causes of destruction, one arrived at the points which
had to be eradicated.

This is of course short-handing the whole cycle enormously. But that is the
general outline.

Survival has been isolated as a common denominator to successful actions

and succumb has been found as the common denominator of unsuccessful
actions. So one does not have to reestablish these.

75
From there, to discover anything bad or good, all one has to do is discard
sterile areas to get a target necessary for investigation.

One looks broadly at the whole scene. Then discards sections of it that
would seem unrewarding. He will then find himself left with the area that con-
tains the key to it.

This is almost easier done than described.

Example: One has the statistics of a nine-division org. Eight are normal. One
isn’t. So he investigates the area of that one. In investigating the one, he discards
all normal bits. He is left with the abnormal one that is the key.

This is true of something bad or something good.

A wise boy who wanted to get on in life would discard all the men who
weren’t getting on and study the one who was. He would come up with some-
thing he could use as a key.

A farmer who wanted to handle a crop menace would disregard all the plants
doing all right and study the one that wasn’t. Then, looking carefully, he would
disregard all the should be’s in that plant and wind up with the shouldn’t be.
He’d have the key.

Sometimes in the final look one finds the key not right there but way over
somewhere else.

The boy, studying the successful man, finds he owed his success to having
worked in a certain bank seven states away from there.

The farmer may well find his hired man let the pigs out into the crop.

But both got the reason why by the same process of discarding wider zones.

Pluspoints or outpoints alike take one along a sequence of discoveries.

Once in a purple moon they mix or cross.

Example: Gross income is up. One discards all normal stats. Aside from
gross income being up, only one other stat is down—new names. Investigation
shows that the public executives were off post all week on a tour and that was
what raked in the money. Conclusion—send out tours as well as man the public
divisions.

Example: Upset is coming from the camp kitchen. Obvious outpoints. Inves-

tigation discloses a 15-year-old cook holding the job solo for 39 field hands! Boy
is he pluspoint. Get him some help!

DRAWN ATTENTION

Having attention dragged into an area is about the way most people “inves-
tigate.” This puts them at effect throughout.

When a man is not predicting, he is often subjected to outpoints that leap up

76
at him. Conversely, when outpoints leap up at one unexpectedly he knows he
better do more than gape at them. He is already behindhand in investigating.
Other signs earlier existed which were disregarded.

ERRORS

The usual error in viewing situations is not to view them widely enough to
begin with.

One gets a despatch which says Central Files don’t exist.

By now keeping one’s attention narrowly on that, one can miss the whole
scene.

To just order Central Files put back in may fail miserably. One has been
given a single observation. It is merely an outpoint: Central Files omitted.

There is no Why.

You follow up “no CF” and you may find the Registrar is in the Public
Division and Letter Registrars never go near a file and the category of everyone
in CF is just “been tested.” You really investigate and you find there’s no HCO
Exec Sec or Dissem Sec and there hasn’t been one for a year.

The cycle of “Outpoint, correct. Outpoint, correct. Outpoint, correct” will

drown one rapidly and improve nothing! But it sure makes a lot of useless work
and worry.

WISDOM
Wisdom is not a fixed idea.

It is knowing how to use your wits.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

77
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue III

Data Series 18

SUMMARY OF OUTPOINTS

OMITTED DATA
An omitted anything is an outpoint.

This can be an omitted person, terminal, object, energy, space, time, form,
sequence or even an omitted scene. Anything that can be omitted that should be
there is an outpoint.

This is easily the most overlooked outpoint as it isn’t there to directly attract
attention.

On several occasions I have found situation analyses done which arrived at
no Why that would have made handling possible but which gave a false Why that
would have upset things if used. In each case the outpoint that held the real clue
was this one of an omitted something. In a dozen cases it was omitted personnel
each time. One area to which orders were being issued had no one in it at all.
Others were undermanned, meaning people were missing. In yet another case
there were no study materials at all. In two other cases the whole of a subject was
missing in the area. Yet no one in any of these cases had spotted the fact that it
was an omitted something that had caused a whole activity to decay. People were
working frantically to remedy the general situation. None of them noticed the
omissions that were the true cause of the decay.

In crime it is as bad to omit as it is to commit. Yet no one seems to notice
the omissions as actual crimes.

Man, trained up in the last century to be a stimulus-response animal, re-
sponds to the therenesses and doesn’t respond as uniformly to not-therenesses.

This opens the door to a habit of deletion or shortening which can become
quite compulsive.

In any analysis which fails to discover a Why, one can safely conclude the
Why is an omission and look for things that should be there and aren’t.

ALTERED SEQUENCE
Any things, events, objects, sizes, in a wrong sequence is an outpoint.

The number series 3, 7, 1, 2, 4, 6, 5 is an altered sequence, or an incorrect
sequence.

78
Doing step two of a sequence of actions before doing step one can be
counted on to tangle any sequence of actions.

The basic outness is no sequence at all. This leads into FIXED IDEAS. It
also shows up in what is called disassociation, an insanity. Things connected to
or similar to each other are not seen as consecutive. Such people also jump about
subjectwise without relation to an obvious sequence. Disassociation is the ex-
treme case where things that are related are not seen to be and things that have
no relation are conceived to have.

Sequence means linear (in a line) travel either through space or time or both.
A sequence that should be one and isn’t is an outpoint.

A “sequence” that isn’t but is thought to be one is an outpoint.

A cart-before-the-horse out of sequence is an outpoint.

One’s hardest task sometimes is indicating an inevitable sequence into the
future that is invisible to another. This is a consequence. “If you saw off the limb
you are sitting on you will of course fall.” Police try to bring this home often
to people who have no concept of sequence; so the threat of punishment works
well on well-behaved citizens and not at all on criminals since they often are
criminals because they can’t think in sequence—they are simply fixated. “If you
kill a man you will be hanged,” is an indicated sequence. A murderer fixated on
revenge cannot think in sequence. One has to think in sequences to have correct
sequences.

Therefore, it is far more common than one would at first imagine to see
altered sequences since persons who do not think in sequence do not see altered
sequences in their own actions or areas.

Visualizing sequences and drills in shifting attention can clean this up and
restore it as a faculty.

Motion pictures and TV were spotted by a recent writer as fixating attention
and not permitting it to travel. Where one had TV-raised children, it would
follow, one possibly would have people with a tendency to altered sequences or
no sequences at all.

DROPPED TIME
Time that should be noted and isn’t would be an outpoint of “dropped time.”
It is a special case of an omitted datum.
Dropped time has a peculiarly ferocious effect that adds up to utter lunacy.

A news bulletin from 1814 and one from 1922 read consecutively without
time assigned produces otherwise undetectable madness.

A summary report of a situation containing events strung over half a year
without saying so can provoke a reaction not in keeping with the current scene.

In madmen the present is the dropped time, leaving them in the haunted past.

79
Just telling a group of madmen to “come up to present time” will produce a few
miraculous “cures.” And getting the date of an ache or pain will often cause it to
vanish.

Time aberrations are so strong that dropped time well qualifies as an out-
point.

FALSEHOOD
When you hear two facts that are contrary, one is a falsehood or both are.

Propaganda and other activities specialize in falsehoods and provoke great
disturbance.

Willful or unintentional, a falsehood is an outpoint. It may be a mistake or a
calculated or defensive falsehood and it is still an outpoint.

A false anything qualifies for this outpoint. A false being, terminal, act,
intention, anything that seeks to be what it isn’t is a falsehood and an outpoint.

Fiction that does not pretend to be anything else is of course not a falsehood.
So the falsehood means “other than it appears” or “other than represented.”
One does not have to concern oneself to define philosophic truth or reality to

see that something stated or modeled to be one thing is in actual fact something
else and therefore an outpoint.

ALTERED IMPORTANCE

An importance shifted from its actual relative importance, up or down, is an
outpoint.

Something can be assigned an importance greater than it has.
Something can be assigned an importance less than it has.

A number of things of different importances can be assigned a monotone of
importance.

These are all outpoints, three versions of the same thing.

All importances are relative to their actuality.

WRONG TARGET

Mistaken objective wherein one believes he is or should be reaching toward
A and finds he is or should be reaching toward B is an outpoint.

This is commonly mistaken identity. It is also mistaken purposes or goals.

If we tear down X we will be okay often results in disclosure that it should
have been Y.

80
“Removing the slums” to make way for modern shops kills the tourist indus-
try. Killing the king to be free from taxation leaves the tax collector alive for the
next regime.

Injustice is usually a wrong target outpoint.
Arrest the drug consumer, award the drug company would be an example.

Military tactics and strategy are almost always an effort to coax the selec-
tion of a wrong target by the enemy.

And most dislikes and spontaneous hates in human relations are based on
mistaken associations of Bill for Pete.

A large sum of aberration is based on wrong targets, wrong sources, wrong
causes.

Incorrectly tell a patient he has ulcers when he hasn’t and he’s hung with an
outpoint which impedes recovery.

The industry spent on wrong objectives would light the world for a millen-
nium.

SUMMARY

These are the fundamental outpoints required in data analysis and situation
analysis.

They have an infinity of variation. They should be very well known to any-
one seeking third dynamic sanity.

They are the basic illogics.

And while there may be others, these will serve.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

81
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 13 OCTOBER 1970
Remimeo Issue I]

Data Series 19

THE REAL WHY

“WHY” as used in logic is subject to noncomprehension.
WHY = that basic outness found which will lead to a recovery of stats.

WRONG WHY = the incorrectly identified outness which when applied
does not lead to recovery.

A MERE EXPLANATION = a “Why” given as THE Why that does not
open the door to any recovery.

Example: A mere explanation: “The stats went down because of rainy
weather that week.” So? So do we now turn off rain? Another mere explanation:
“The staff became overwhelmed that week.” An order saying “Don’t overwhelm
staff” would be the possible “solution” of some manager. BUT THE STATS
WOULDN’T RECOVER.

The real Why when found and corrected leads straight back to improved stats.
A wrong Why, corrected, will further depress stats.

A mere explanation does nothing at all and decay continues.

Here is a situation as it is followed up:

The stats of an area were down. Investigation disclosed there had been sick-
ness 2 weeks before. The report came in: “The stats were down because people
were sick.” This was a mere explanation. Very reasonable. But it solved nothing.
What do we do now? Maybe we accept this as the correct Why. And give an
order, “All people in the area must get a medical exam and unhealthy workers
will not be accepted and unhealthy ones will be fired.” As it’s a correction to a
wrong Why, the stats really crash. So that’s not it. Looking further we find the
real Why. In the area there is no trained-in org bd and a boss there gives orders
to the wrong people which, when executed, then hurt their individual stats. We
org board the place and groove in the boss and we get a stat recovery and even
an improvement.

The correct Why led to a stat recovery.

Here is another one. Stats are down in a school. An investigation comes up
with a mere explanation: “The students were all busy with sports.” So manage-
ment says “No sports!” Stats go down again. A new investigation comes up with

82
a wrong Why: “The students are being taught wrongly.”” Management sacks the
dean. Stats really crash now. A further more competent investigation occurs. It
turns out that there were 140 students and only the dean and one instructor! And
the dean had other duties! We put the dean back on post and hire two more
instructors making three. Stats soar. Because we got the right Why.

Management and organizational catastrophes and successes are ALL ex-
plained by these three types of Why. An arbitrary is probably just a wrong Why
held in by law. And if so held in, it will crash the place.

One really has to understand logic to get to the correct Why and must really
be on his toes not to use and correct a wrong Why.

In world banking, where inflation occurs, finance regulations or laws are
probably just one long parade of wrong Whys. The value of the money and its
usefulness to the citizen deteriorate to such an extent that a whole ideology can
be built up (as in Sparta by Lycurgus who invented iron money nobody could lift
in order to rid Sparta of money evils) that knocks money out entirely and puts
nothing but nonsense in its place.

Organizational troubles are greatly worsened by using mere explanations
(which lead to no remedies) or wrong Whys (which further depress stats). Organi-
zational recoveries come from finding the real Why and correcting it.

The test of the real Why is “When it is corrected, do stats recover?” If they

do that was it. And any other remedial order given but based on a wrong Why
would have to be cancelled quickly.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

83
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 26 NOVEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Data Series 20

MORE OUTPOINTS

While there could be many many oddities classifiable as outpoints, those
selected and named as such are major in importance whereas others are minor.

WRONG SOURCE
‘““Wrong source” is the other side of the coin of wrong target.

Information taken from wrong source, orders taken from the wrong source,
gifts or materiel taken from wrong source all add up to eventual confusion and
possible trouble.

Unwittingly receiving from a wrong source can be very embarrassing or con-
fusing, so much so that it is a favorite intelligence trick. Dept D in East Ger-
many, the Dept of Disinformation, has very intricate methods of planting false
information and disguising its source.

Technology can come from wrong source. For instance, Leipzig University’s
school of psychology and psychiatry opened the door to death camps in Hitler’s
Germany. Using drugs, these men apparently gave Hitler to the world as their
puppet. They tortured, maimed and slaughtered over 12,000,000 Germans in
death camps. At the end of World War II these extremists formed the “World
Federation of Mental Health,” which enlisted the American Psychiatric Association
and the American Medical Association and established “National Associations
for Mental Health” over the world, cowed news media, smashed any new tech-
nology and became the sole advisers to the US government on “mental health,
education and welfare” and the appointers of all health ministers through the
civilized world, and through their graduate Pavlov dominated Russian communist
“mental health.” This source is so wrong that it is destroying man, having
already destroyed scores of millions. (All statements given here are documented.)

Not only taking data from wrong source but officialdom from it can there-
fore be sufficiently aberrated as to result in planetary insanity.

In a lesser level, taking a report from a known bad hat and acting upon it is
the usual reason for errors made in management.

CONTRARY FACTS

When two statements are made on one subject which are contrary to each
other, we have “contrary facts.”

84
Previously we classified this illogic as a falsehood, since one of them must
be false.

But in doing data analysis one cannot offhand distinguish which is the false
fact. Thus it becomes a special outpoint.

“They made a high of $12,000 that week” and “They couldn’t pay staff”
occurring in the same time period gives us one or both as false. We may not
know which is true but we do know they are contrary and can so label it.

In interrogation this point is so important that anyone giving two contrary
facts becomes a prime suspect for further investigation. “I am a Swiss citizen” as

a statement from someone who has had a German passport found in his baggage
would be an example.

When two “facts” are contrary or contradictory, we may not know which is
true but we do know they can’t both be true.

Issued by the same org, even from two different people in that org, two
contradictory “facts” qualifies as an outpoint.

These two will be found useful in analysis.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

85
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 15 MARCH 1971RA

Remimeo Issue IT

Admin Students REVISED 21 SEPTEMBER 1981
Tech/Qual

C/Ses

HGCs

Cramming Officers

Data Series 2IRA

DATA SERIES AUDITING

Refs:

HCOB 28 Aug. 7ORB HC OUTPOINT-PLUSPOINT
Rev, 27.1.81 LISTS RB

HCO PL 30 Nov. 76R ONLY SSO CAN TIP
Rev. 25.4.79

Whenever a student cannot grasp or retain the data of the DATA SERIES
policy letters, he must be audited on the HC OUTPOINT-PLUSPOINT LISTS.

The reason for this is that he himself has OUTPOINTS and it is necessary to
audit him on this subject.

When the student has outpoints, it has been found that he has a terrible time
grasping or retaining the Data Series material.

This does not mean the student is in any way crazy. It just means he is
illogical and has outpoints in his thinking.

This will reflect as well in his other studies.

So handling this is a vital action.

At the discretion of the SSO and C/S, the student may also be programed
for Method One Word Clearing, the PRD, the Study Green Form or any of the
various student repairs, New Era Dianetics, etc. He can also be given Super
Power when released.

An individual program is worked out for the student using the available tech
so that he can master the Data Series material.

L. RON HUBBARD

Founder

Revision assisted by
Mission Issues Revision

86
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 31 JANUARY 1972

Remimeo

Data Series 22

THE WHY IS GOD

When beings operate mainly on illogics, they are unable to conceive of valid
reasons for things or to see that effects are directly caused by things they them-
selves can control.

The inability to observe and find an actual usable Why is the downfall of
beings and activities. This is factually the Why of people not finding Whys and
using them.

The prevalence of historical man’s use of “fate,” “kismet” (fatalism), super-
stition, fortunetelling, astrology and mysticism confirms this.

Having forgotten to keep seed grain for the spring, the farmer starves the
following year and when asked Why he is starving says it is the gods, that he has
sinned or that he failed to make sacrifice. In short, unable to think, he says “The
Why is God.”

This condition does not just affect primitives or backward people.

All through the most modern organizations you can find “The Why is God”
in other forms.

By believing that it is the fault of other divisions or departments, a staff
member does not look into his own scene. “The reason I cannot load the lumber
is because ‘the Personnel Section’ will not find and hire people.” It does not
seem to occur to this fellow that he is using a Why which he can’t control so it is
not a Why for his area. It does not move the existing to the ideal scene. Thus it
is not a Why for him. Yet he will use it and go on nattering about it. And the
lumber never gets loaded. The real Why for him more likely would be, “I have
no right to hire day laborers. I must obtain this right before my area breaks down
totally,” or “My department posts are too specialized. I need to operate on all
hands actions on peak loads.”

A Course Supervisor who says, “I haven’t got any students because Ethics
keeps them for weeks and Cramming for months” is using a “The Why is God.”
As he cannot control Ethics or Cramming from his post, his Why is illogical.
The real Why is probably “I am not mustering all my students daily and keeping
them on course. If they are ordered to Ethics or Cramming, they must be right
here studying except for the actual minutes spent in Ethics and Cramming.”

But this does not just apply on small activities. It applies to whole nations.

87
“The reason we Germans cannot advance is because England is against us.”” This
wrong Why has killed many tens of millions in two world wars.

Intelligence organizations are often almost dedicated to “the Why is over
there.” It seldom is.

Most staffs of orgs, when pay is poor, are completely addicted to over-
thereness. In one org, the Finance Banking Officer was continuously hammered
to “give more money” by the people who were responsible for making the
money and yet who were not raising a finger to do so. An actual survey of four
org staffs showed that only 2 percent were aware that their pay depended upon
the org gross income!

Thus survival is very closely tied to logic. If one finds he is sinking into
apathy over his inability to get his job done, it is certain that he is operating on
self-conceived wrong Whys in areas that he cannot ever hope to control.

And in living any life, most major points of decline can be traced to the
person’s operating on Whys that do not allow him to improve his own scene.

The Greek cut open the guts of birds to find the Why. He called this “divi-
nation” or “augury.” Don’t look now, but that civilization has long been dead!

Just as anyone will be whose illogic leads him to over-thereness to find his
Whys.

Strength and power in the individual consists of being logical enough to find
Whys he can use to advance his existing scene toward the ideal scene.

The Why is NOT God. It lies with YOU and your ability to be logical.

God helps those who help themselves.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

88
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 17 FEBRUARY 1972

Remimeo

Data Series 23

PROPER FORMAT AND CORRECT ACTION

When doing an evaluation, one can become far too fixated on outpoints and
miss the real reason one is doing an evaluation in the first place.

To handle this, it is proper form to write up an evaluation so as to keep in
view the reason one is doing one.

This is accomplished by using this form:

SITUATION:

DATA:

STATS:

WHY:

IDEAL SCENE:

HANDLING:

CONSISTENCY

The whole of it should concern itself with the same general scene, the same
subject matter. This is known as CONSISTENCY. One does not have a Situation
about books, Data about bicycles, Stats of another person, a Why about another
area, a different subject for Ideal Scene and Handling for another activity.

The Situation, whether good or bad, must be about a certain subject, person
or area, the Data must be about the same, the Stats are of that same thing, the

89
Why relates to that same thing, the Ideal Scene is about the scene of that same
thing and the Handling handles that thing and especially is regulated by that Why.

A proper evaluation is all of a piece.

SITUATION

First, to do an evaluation, some situation must have come to notice. There is
a report or observation that is out of the ordinary.

This “coming to notice” occurs on any line. Usually it is fairly major, af-
fecting a large portion of the area, but it can be minor.

So OBSERVATION in general must be continuous for situations to be noted.

To just note a situation and act on it is out of sequence as it omits evaluation.
You can be elated or shocked uselessly by noting a situation and then not doing
any evaluation.

It is the hallmark of a rank amateur or idiot to act on reports without any
evaluation.

So, the first step is noting, from general alertness, a situation exists.

A situation is defined as a not expected state of affairs. It is either very good
or it is very bad.

If it is very good, it must be evaluated and a Why found so one can even
upgrade an ideal scene.

If it is very bad, it must be evaluated and a Why found so that it can be
handled to more closely approach the ideal scene.

DATA
Data is the information one has received that alerts one to the situation.

Intelligence systems use various (mainly faulty) methods of “evaluating”
data so as to “confirm it.” They do this uniformly from reports. No matter how
many reports one may see, there is always a question as to their truth. Intelli-
gence chiefs have started most wars (US vs. Germany 1917) or failed to start
them in time (US vs. Japan 1936) by depending on “authoritative sources,”
“skilled observers,” “valid documents” and other confetti they class as “reports”
or “documents.”

As noted above, the “raw document” or ‘raw materials” as they are called
have led, when accepted, to the most terrifying catastrophes. British Admiral
Hall, without permission of the British government, leaked the famous “Zim-
merman telegram” to US President Wilson and stampeded the US into World
War I. The alleged German “instructions” to their US Ambassador “intercepted”
by Hall were passed on with confidence tricks and President Wilson, elected to
keep the US out of the war, being no great evaluator, dived overboard on one
flimsy questionable report and carried America into the disaster of two world
wars and a communist supremacy.

90
The US was lulled by false Japanese assurances and false data on the small-
ness of Japanese armaments and considered the country no danger. The true
situation would have led to a US declaration of war in 1936! Before Japan could
sink the whole Pacific fleet in one raid and cause 4'4 years of war and open all
of China to communist supremacy.

These are just a couple of the thousands of disasters in international affairs
brought about by a pathetic reliance on reports or documents.

If you knew the game well, with a half a dozen agents and a document
factory, you could have half the countries of the planet in turmoil. Because they
rely on reports and “authoritative sources” and “expert opinion” instead of data
as viewed in this Data Series.

If one does not court disaster and failures, one does NOT rely on reports,
but an absence of reports or a volume of reports carefully surveyed for outpoints
and counted.

To do this one must be VERY skilled at spotting outpoints. Most people
confuse simple errors with actual outpoints.

You can get so good at this you can recognize outpoints and pluspoints at a
fast glance over reports.

Essentially, “data” regarded from the angle of outpoints is a lack of consis-
tency. “Our Div 2 is doing very well’ doesn’t go with gross income $2.

This gives you a guideline, the “string to pull” (see investigation checksheet
on following down things you just don’t understand, the first emergence of the
Data Series).

So the DATA you give is not a lot of reports. It is a brief summary of the
“strings pulled”? on the outpoint or pluspoint route to finally get the Why.

Example: (from a situation where an org was going broke) “The sign-ups
reported for service and new names to Central Files were both high yet gross
income was down. An investigation of the service area showed no backlogs and
no new customers with the staff idle. Tech Services was fully staffed. Examining
complement showed no one in the Department of Income. People were signed up
but there was no one to receive the money.” The Why of course was a wrong
complement, particularly NO CASHIER and an Executive Director neglecting
his duties.

Example: (on a situation of a stat soaring) “The Promo Dept had very down
stats with no promo going out. Bulk mail was low. Div 6 was idle, yet the GI was
soaring. Nothing in the org could be found to account for it. Investigation of what
promo incoming public had, showed that the promo was coming from a lower-
level org promoting itself as a route to upper-level services.”” The Why of course
was an effective promo campaign being run OUTSIDE the org. And one could
bolster that up and get the org active too.

DATA, then, is the Sherlock Holming of the trail that gave the Why. It at

once reflects the command the evaluator has of the DATA SERIES. And his own
cleverness.

91
Sometimes they come in a sudden blue flash a yard long, a piece of insight
into what MUST be going on if these outpoints add up this way. Rapid investi-
gation of further data on this trail proves or disproves the flash of insight. One
does NOT run on insight alone (or crystal balls).

To one not trained and practiced in evaluation, the finding of a REAL WHY
may look as mysterious as an airplane to an aborigine.

It is a fact that people who do not understand evaluation can get the idea that
management acts on personalities or whims or that management has spies every-
where to know that the Distribution Secretary never came to work.

To the expert it is easy. To the ignorant it looks very supernatural.
It is the TRAIL followed that counts.

This is what is required under “DATA.”

STATS
Situations and DATA trails are supported by statistics.

Where statistics are not in numeral form, this may be harder. Where they are
outright lies, this is an outpoint itself.

A person or nation without any statistic may be a puzzle at first but statistical
approximations can exist and be valid.

Statistics of CIA would be very hard to dig up. They don’t even let the US
Congress in on it. But the deteriorating overseas influence of the US would show
that CIA was not batting any high average and that its data fed to policymakers
(its avowed purpose) might well be false or misleading, causing policy errors that
cause a deteriorating scene.

So statistics can be estimated by the scene itself even when absent in numer-
ical form.

England has lost its whole empire in a quarter of a century, without a single
defeat in war. This gives an adequate statistic for the government’s good sense or
lack of it. It is at this writing losing even parts of the homeland and is itself
joining what might be called the Fourth Reich and so will soon cease to exist as
a political sovereignty. This statistic can even be drawn as a dive-bombing down
curve.

A deckhand’s statistic may not exist on a chart but the areas he tends do
exist for view.

One either has a numerical statistic or a direct observation. One can use
both.

I once answered the question, “Why are paid completions high and gross
income low?” by finding that the “paid” completions stats were false.

So one statistic can be compared to another.

92
Three or more stats can be compared to each other and often lead directly to
a Why.

The main point is DON’T ACT WITHOUT STATISTICAL DATA.

After a fine data analysis, one may well find the stats are quite normal and
there is NO situation.

One may have a great PR PR PR data analysis and collide with statistics
you'd need a submarine to read.

And one may have data that says the whole staff of Keokuk should be shot
without waiting for dawn and then discover that, by stats, they’re doing great.

And one can also do a data analysis that shows somebody should be com-
mended and prove it by stats and then discover belatedly the stats are false and
the guy should have been shot.

However, if one looks at all available stats after doing a data analysis one
may find they look good at a glance but are sour as green apples. One could see
a high lot of stats, GI, etc., and then see a cost stat that shows someone is
making $2 million at a cost of $4 million and that the place is going straight into
the garbage can.

DO NOT give a Why or recommend handling without inspecting the actual
stats.

And DO NOT be thrown off a situation you are sure exists without looking

at ALL the stats. (Example: High hour interns’ stats throw one off interfering
until one sees NO interns graduating and NO programs completed by them.)

THE WHY

This is the jewel in the crown, the main dish at dinner, the gold mine in the
towering mountains of mystery.

A real Why must lead to a bettering of the existing scene or (in the case of a
wonderful new scene) maintaining it as a new ideal scene.

Therefore the Why must be something you can do something about. (See
THE WHY IS GOD policy letter.)

Thus the Why is limited by what you can control. It is NEVER that other
division or top management or the bumps on the moon.

Even if all this were true, the Why must be something which

YOU CAN DO SOMETHING ABOUT YOURSELF FROM YOUR LEVEL
OF AUTHORITY OR INITIATIVE that will lead to

THE IMPROVEMENT OF A POOR EXISTING SCENE TOWARD THE
IDEAL SCENE.

The Why is a special thing then. It is a key that opens the door to effective
improvement.

93
It is not a prejudice or a good idea. It is where all the analysis led.

And a REAL Why when used and handled and acted upon is like a magic
carpet. The scene at once becomes potentially better or gets maintained.

“Acting on a wrong Why” is the stuff of which coffins are made.
No matter how brilliant the program that follows, there it is, the same old mud.

Wrong Whys work people half to death handling a program which will lay
ostrich eggs and rotten ones at that.

It will cost money and time that can’t be afforded easily.

It will distract from the real tiger in the woods and let him roar and eat up
the goats while everyone is off chasing the ghosts which “really were the cause
of it all.”

Wrong Whys are the tombstones of all great civilizations and, unless some-
one gears up the think, will be the mausoleum of this one.

Do not think you won’t get them. It takes 28,000 casualties in battle, they
say, to make a major general. Well it may take a few wrong Whys to make an
evaluator.

The evaluator who has done the evaluation is of course responsible for it
being correctly done and leading to the right conclusion and verified by stats to
give the correct real Why.

And the real ones are often too incredible to have been arrived at in any
other way. Or they are so obvious no one noticed.

In one instance Whys were found by experts for six months on a certain
course without improving the flagrantly bad situation but actually messing it up
more until a huge real Why jumped out (the students had never been trained on
earlier levels) and the situation began to improve.

Using one Why for all situations can also occur and fads of Whys are com-
mon. True, a Why often applies elsewhere. That’s what gives us technology
including policy. But in any area of operation where a situation is very abnormal
the Why is likely to be very peculiar and too off the ordinary to be grasped at once.

There can be an infinity of wrongnesses around just one rightness. Thus
there can be an infinity of wrong Whys possible with just one real Why that will
open the door.

For the real Why does open the door. With it on a good situation one can
maintain it and with a bad situation one can improve it.

Thus the REAL WHY is the vital arrival point to which evaluation leads.

94
THE IDEAL SCENE

If a bad situation is a departure from the ideal scene and if a good situation
is attaining it or exceeding it, then the crux of any evaluation is THE IDEAL
SCENE for the area one is evaluating.

Viewpoint has a lot to do with the ideal scene.

To Russia a collapsed America is the ideal scene. To America a collapsed
Russia is an ideal scene.

To some have-not nations both Russia and the US competing at vast expense
for the favor of a coy petty ruler is the ideal scene to that ruler.

To most other parts of the world both these major countries interested only in
their own affairs would be an ideal scene.

So, with viewpoint the ideal scene can be ‘“‘bad” or “good.”

The ideal scene is not necessarily big and broad. An intelligence evaluator
that gave the ideal scene as “a defeated enemy” on every evaluation would be
very inexpert.

By CONSISTENCY the ideal scene must be one for that portion of an ac-
tivity for which one is trying to find the Why.

Example: (Situation: renewed activity on a front held by one platoon. Evalu-
ation: no other points along the lines are active and a tank road leads toward the
front where the activity is. Why: area being prepared for a tank breakout.)
IDEAL SCENE: an uninhabitable area in front of the platoon. (Which could be
done with napalm as there is a wood there and a heavy crossfire maintained and
a renewed supply of bazookas for the platoon if the napalm didn’t work.)

Example: (Situation: a lot of silence from Plant 22. Evaluation: no trucks
arriving with materials, no raw materials being sent by outside suppliers, suppliers
irate. Why: the accounting office forgot to pay the raw materials bill and the
suppliers held up all further supplies.) The IDEAL SCENE: high credit rating
and good accounts PR established with all creditors. (And handling would in-
clude a recommendation for an evaluation of the accounting office as to why
it forgot and why there is no high credit PR with a new ideal scene for that
accounting office, which might be a wholly different thing: IDEAL SCENE: an
accounting office that enforces income greater than outgo.)

By giving the IDEAL SCENE for every situation, the evaluator is not led
into a fatal contempt for the competence of all work actually being done.

The ideal scene clarifies for one and all whither we are going.
But even more important, the evaluation that includes an ideal scene postu-
lates a win from the viewpoint of those for whom it is being done or for one’s

activities.

Sometimes when one gets to the ideal scene and writes it down he finds his

95
Why won’t really lead to it, in which case he must get another Why or familiar-
ize himself with the scene in general to find out what he is trying to send where.

In the case of an abnormally good situation one finds he has exceeded what
was formerly thought to be the ideal scene and must state a new one entirely with
the Why concerned with how to maintain it.

Anyone reading a full evaluation in proper form can better estimate whether
the Why and handling are workable if the IDEAL SCENE is there. And some-
times it will be found that the evaluator is trying to do something else entirely
than what everyone else thinks is a correct attainment.

Thus it is a very healthy thing to include the ideal scene. It serves as a
discipline and incentive for the evaluator and those executing the program.

HANDLING

Handling must be CONSISTENT with the Situation, the evaluation, the Why
and the Ideal Scene.

Handling must be WITHIN THE CAPABILITIES of those who will do the
actions.

Handling must be WITHIN THE RESOURCES AVAILABLE.
Handling quite often but not always requires a BRIGHT IDEA. It is pecu-
liarly true that the less the resources available the brighter the idea required to

attain effective handling.

Handling must be SUPERVISED by one person who acts as a coordinator of
the program and a checker-offer and debug expert.

And last but most important handling must be EFFECTIVE AND FINAL.

The steps of handling are in program form. They are numbered 1,2,3, etc.
Or A,B,C, etc.

They can be in the sequence they will be done but this is mostly important
when one person or one team is going to do the whole thing step by step.

These steps are called TARGETS.

Each part of the program (each TARGET) is assigned to someone to do or to
get done.

Care must be taken not to overload persons already loaded and where this
occurs One appoints a special personnel or mission for that specific target.

The supervision must see that each target gets fully done and no targets
not-done and no targets half-done.

It is up to supervision to keep track of all completions on a MASTER sheet.

Supervision debugs those targets that bog or lag by finding in them a Why,

96
which may mean a rapid evaluation of that target to rephrase it or get it clarified
without altering its intended accomplishment.

Supervision can reassign a target.
PROJECTS

It is expected that any complex or extensive target will have a PROJECT
written for it by the person to whom it is assigned, if not by the originator.

By completing this project, the target is DONE.

Often these projects have to be passed upon by a senior before being begun.

COMPLIANCE

When the MASTER sheet shows all targets DONE (not not-done and not
half-done and not falsely reported) full situation handling can be expected.

REVIEW

When the supervisor reports all targets done, it is in the hands of fate
whether the situation will now be progressed toward or attain the ideal scene.

The accuracy of the data, the skill of the evaluator, the correctness of the
Why, the competence of the supervisor and the skill of those executing the tar-
gets and the willingness of those receiving the effects of all this activity (their
human emotion and reaction) determine whether this evaluation approaches or
attains the ideal scene.

All such evaluations should be REVIEWED as soon as the actions have had
time to take effect.

An idiot optimism can suppose all is well and that it is needless to review.

But if this Why was wrong then the situation will deteriorate and a worsen-
ing situation will be apparent.

Thus a sharp watch has to be set. No thirst for “always being right” or
arrogance about never being wrong must prevent an honest review.

WAS the ideal scene approached or attained?
Or was it a wrong Why and now is all Hades breaking loose?

Now we don’t have just renewed insistence that the Why was right and that
the program must go in in spite of all.

We have a wrong Why.

97
MAGIC

IT WILL BE FOUND THAT WHERE YOU HAVE A REAL WHY
PEOPLE WILL COOPERATE ALL OVER THE SCENE.

The only exception is where there are traitors around. But this is an easy
explanation, too often bought to excuse wrong Whys.

The Germans, when they found in World War II how ineffective the Italian
intelligence service was, couldn’t believe it, tried to improve it, became con-
vinced they were traitors, probably shot them in scores and took the service over
themselves. And lost Italy even more rapidly. Whatever the right Why was, the
Germans had the wrong one. And so does any executive who has to shoot
everybody—he just can’t find the right Whys.

It is NO disgrace to find a wrong Why. It is only a disgrace not to keep
trying on and on until one does find it. Then the clouds open, the sun shines, the
birds pour out their souls in purest melody and the ideal scene is approached or
reached.

So REVIEW is damnably important.

Situations have to be handled very fast.

And reviews have to be as quick as possible after effect can occur.

WHOLE VIEW

So here you have the whole view.

The keynotes are OBSERVE, EVALUATE, PROGRAM, SUPERVISE and
REVIEW.

The heart of Observe is accuracy.

The heart of Evaluate is a cool, cold knowledge of the Data Series.
The heart of Program is knowing the scene.

The heart of Supervise is getting it FULLY done.

The heart of Review is HUMILITY.

SUMMARY

If you cannot roll all this off rapidly, then misunderstood words in this series
are in the way. Or one is battling with some outpoint in his own life.

The Data Series is for USE.
It works because it has unlocked logic.
In management one is very fortunate since he can program and handle.

In intelligence one is less fortunate as his handling can only be suggested

98
and many an intelligence officer has watched a useless Battle of the Bulge after
he told them all about it and “they’’ had other ideas. But the Data Series works
in intelligence as well.

Data analysis was not developed in a professorial out of a lost-to-the-world
tower. It was evolved by attempting to explain logic, then was developed on one
of the hottest cross fire but successful evaluation posts on the planet against a
background of blood, sweat and tears war-intelligence experience.

So it is itself REAL.

The key to it is handling DATA.

So here it is.

I do sincerely hope it serves you in helping to attain your ideal scene.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

99
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 FEBRUARY 1972RA
Remimeo Issue I]
REVISED 3 NOVEMBER 1990

Data Series 24RA

HANDLING
POLICY, PLANS, PROGRAMS,
PROJECTS AND ORDERS DEFINED

99 G6 > «66 > a

The words “policy,” “plans,” “programs,” “projects” and “orders” are often
used interchangeably one for the other, incorrectly.

99 66

To handle any confusions on the words and substance of “policy,” “plans,”
“programs,” “projects” and “orders” the following DESCRIPTIVE DEFINI-
TIONS (see Scn Logic 5) are laid down for our use.

POLICY: By this is meant long-range truths or facts which are not subject to
change expressed as operational rules or guides.

PLANS: Short-range broad intentions as to the contemplated actions envisaged
for the handling of a broad area to remedy it or expand it or to obstruct or
impede an opposition to expansion. A plan is usually based on observation
of potentials (or resources) and expresses a bright idea of how to use them. It
always proceeds from a REAL WHY if it is to be successful.

PROGRAM. A series of steps in sequence to carry out a plan. One usually
sees a program following the discovery of a Why. But in actual fact a plan had to
exist in the person’s mind, whether written or not, before a program could be
written. A program, thus, carries out the plan conceived to handle a found Why.
A plan and its program require authorization (or okay) from the central or coor-
dinating authority of the general activities of a group before they can be invested
in, activated or executed.

PROJECTS: The sequence of steps written to carry out ONE step of a pro-
gram. Project orders often have to be written to execute a program step. These
should be written but usually do not require any approval and often are not gen-
erally issued but go to the person or persons who will accomplish that step of a
program. Under the category of PROJECT would come orders, work projects,
etc. These are a series of GUIDING STEPS which if followed will result in a full
and successful accomplishment of the program target.

ORDERS: The verbal or written direction from a lower or designated authority
to carry out a program step or apply the general policy.

100
In short:

POLICY = the rules of the game, the facts of life, the discovered truths and
the invariable procedures.

PLAN = the general bright idea one has to remedy the Why found and get
things up to the ideal scene or improve even that. (Approval)

PROGRAM = the sequence of major actions needed to do the plan. (Approval)

PROJECT = the sequence of steps necessary to carry out one step in a
program. (No approval)

ORDERS = some program steps are so simple that they are themselves an
order or an order can simply be a roughly written project.

Thus, by these definitions a data analysis would look like this:
POLICY: (What brings the evaluation into existence in the first place.)

SITUATION. (Departure from or improvement of the ideal scene expressed in
policy.)

DATA: (Observations leading to INVESTIGATION.)

STATISTICS: (The independent continuing survey of production or lack of it.)
WHY: (The real reason found by the investigation.)

ETHICS WHY: (The ethics reason found below a Why.)

IDEAL SCENE: (The state of affairs envisioned by policy or the improve-
ment of even that.)

HANDLING:

A PLAN whether written in full or not based on the Whys to use the re-
sources available to move the existing scene toward the ideal scene.

A PROGRAM: A sequence of broad steps to get the plan executed.

PROJECTS: Any sequence of steps ordered or written to get a program step
completed.

ORDERS: The program step itself or the verbal or written project to get the
program step fully done.

Thus a handling could look like this:
HANDLING:

Plan: To use Bob Bartlett to replace the incompetent exec found in the Why.

101
1. Find a replacement for Bartlett. PERSONNEL

2. Program Bob Bartlett to get his incomplete cycles caught up.
DIR OF PERSONNEL ENHANCEMENT

3. Train Bob Bartlett. DIR OF TRAINING _____

4. Write Garrison Mission Orders for Bartlett.
ACTION MISSION WRITER

5. Write recall orders for G. Zonk (the incompetent found in the Why).

PERSONNEL
6. Send Bartlett to relieve Zonk. ACTION
7. On Zonk’s return assign to bilge cleaner. PERSONNEL

This of course is a very simple plan and simple program.

The orders are seen as “PERSONNEL,” “DIR OF PERSONNEL EN-
HANCEMENT,” “ACTION MISSION WRITER,” etc., at the paragraph ends.
The program step itself is an ORDER to the person or unit named at program step
end. But IT ALSO AUTHORIZES THAT PERSON OR UNIT TO DO THE
STEP OR ISSUE ORDERS TO DO THE STEP OR EVEN WRITE A PROJECT
AND GET IT DONE.

That final end word on the program step is an AUTHORITY as well as
being an order to the person or unit named.

ROUNDUP

A copy of a full program marked MASTER is placed in a folder. The folder
is marked on the edge with the program name and number. The program itself is
stapled along its left edge to the inside left cover of the folder.

An “LRH Comm” is responsible for “LRH programs.” A “Flag Rep” is
responsible for compliance to the org’s evaluation. The Executive Director’s/
Commanding Officer’s Programs Ops is responsible for an ED’s or CO’s programs.

The responsibility lies in seeing that each step is FULLY effectively DONE.

All related papers, copies of projects’ orders, etc., are collected in that folder

and as each done is reported and investigated as DONE it is marked off on the
MASTER program sheet.

102
When ail those projects or orders bred by the program steps are DONE then
the PROGRAM is considered DONE.

One does not “report progress” but only DONES and when something is
NOT done yet it is chased up by the “LRH Comm,” “Flag Rep” or “ED/CO’s
Programs Ops” and “debugged.”

DEBUGGING
The word “bugged” is slang for snarled up or halted.
DEBUG is to get the snarls or stops out of it.

This itself requires an evaluation. The evaluation may be done at a glance or
it may take a full formal] evaluation by form.

The ideal scene here is the program step DONE or even improved.

So the Why here would be the REAL reason it was not being done or
couldn’t be done and that may require hours to locate and sometimes days to
remedy.

When “debugging” one usually finds the persons assigned the target already
have a “Why” and it is usually a false Why for if it was the right one the program
step would get done.

Thus debugging usually begins with finding ‘their Whys” — which is to say
reasons, excuses, apologies, etc. Getting these into view is a main part of the
program step evaluation.

A project, often written, comes out of this DEBUG EVALUATION.

In extreme cases it will be found that the whole program is based on a
wrong Why and rapidly needs redoing by the original authority. Example: The
Why found was that the JINX OFFICE WAS NOT MAKING MONEY. In doing
one step of the program: “3. Survey past invoices to find where money is coming
from and why they don’t get it now. MISSION.” The mission sent finds Jinx
Office was making money by the ton but it was being wasted by their having
bought a huge building whose rent is three times normal rental “in the hopes new
subtenants would pay the rent but nobody wants the place.” Rapid debug is
needed because the target can’t really be done. They ARE making money and
they do get it now.

In such a case doing the program unearthed a new REAL WHY and
scrubbed that program.

A super-frantic hysterical communication would be sent to the authority of
the program “New Why found by Pgm 891 target 3 observation. Jinx Office
paying $80,000 a quarter for skyscraper. Obvious real Why ED has delusions of
grandeur, is a bad business head. Suggest Pgm 891 redone on new Why and
suggest plan of mission here for instant offload of this skyscraper and office into
proper quarters and replacement of ED.” At which the “LRH Comm,” “Flag
Rep” or “ED/CO’s Programs Ops” will approach the authority for the pgm to

103
get immediate cancellation of 891 and all program targets and a new Program
891R based on the REAL REAL WHY.

Debug, however, is not always so dramatic: “We don’t have anyone to put on
it” is the usual excuse as they sit lazily chatting amongst their piled up dev-t.

So one evaluates the area against the program target and finds a Why that,
executed as a project will get that target done.

The PERFECT DEBUG EVALUATION (a) gets the target done, (b) im-
proves the area, (c) leaves no dregs of human emotion and reaction behind it.

Just plain screaming often works. But if one has to, there is a real Why there
someplace that should be found, a project handed out and done.

HANDLING SUMMARY

You can find out all the SITUATIONS and WHYS in the world but if there
isn’t a PLAN and PROGRAM and if these are not DONE fully, then nothing
beneficial will happen. Indeed the not-dones, half-dones and backlogs will mount
up (per HCO PL 26 Jan. 72 I, NOT-DONES, HALF-DONES AND BACK-
LOGS) and set the whole thing a step backwards.

Bad programs and clumsy projects develop useless traffic (dev-t) and tie
people up all over the place, pull them off normal needful actions and send the
existing scene even further from the ideal scene. They make people very busy
but nothing beneficial is gained and as the useless actions distract from normal
duties, the whole place is at risk.

Staffs subjected to programs that are not based on sound observation, eval-
uation, a REAL WHY and the points in Data Series 23, become apathetic as they
see no result.

So programs that are bad and programs that are right but don’t get fully
done are alike deadly. THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE FOR CORRECTLY DONE
DATA ANALYSIS.

THERE IS NO EXCUSE FOR NOT GETTING CORRECT PROGRAMS
DONE.

In this way and only in this way can one raise the existing scene toward an
ideal scene.

Data analysis is a powerful tool. YOU CAN USE IT.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Revision assisted by

LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

104
Remimeo

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 MARCH 1972
Issue II

Data Series 25

LEARNING TO USE DATA ANALYSIS

After one has studied data analysis, he is expected to be able to use its
principles easily and swiftly.

The barriers to being able to use data analysis are, in the order of frequency:

1.

Misunderstood words. One has not gotten the definitions of the words
used. This does not mean “new words.” It is usually old common
words. It is not just long words, it is more usually little ones. To handle
this, one takes each policy letter (or chapter) in turn and looks it over
carefully to see what words he cannot rapidly define. To help in this,
one uses an E-Meter and “Method 4” Word Clearing which is the
method of using a meter to see if—“Are there any words in this policy
misunderstood?” Any upset or antagonism or boredom felt comes only
from a misunderstood word or misunderstood words.

. The person has himself an outpoint in his routine thinking. This is found

and handled by what is called an “HC (Hubbard Consultant) List.” This
list assessed on a meter detects and handles this.

. Lack of knowledge of an existing or an ideal scene. This is handled by

observing the existing scene directly or indirectly by reports and, for the
ideal, study of the basic policy of the scene which gives one its ideal, its
expected products and form of organization.

. Not having studied the Data Series. Handled by studying it properly.
. Not having studied data analysis from the viewpoint of needing to apply it.

. Thinking one already knows all about analyzing and data. Handled by

looking over some past failures and realizing they could have been
prevented by a proper collection of data and analyzing it.

. Tossing off “reasons” personally on one’s own personal area which are

usually just excuses or justifications and not Whys. “I was too tired,” “I
should have been tougher,”’ “They were just bums anyway,” which loads
up one’s own life with wrong Whys. Handled by being more alert to and
more honest about the causes and motives of one’s life and the scene,
and doing a better analysis.

. Confusing errors with outpoints. Handled by practice.

105
9. Confusing outpoints with Whys. Handled by learning to observe and
better study of data analysis.

10. Too narrow a situation. Handled by getting more data and observing the
scene more broadly.

11. Missing ‘omitted data” or particles or people as a frequent outpoint.
Handled by knowing the ideal scene better. What should be there and
isn't.

THE BEGINNER

When one begins to apply data analysis, he is often still trying to grasp the
data about data analysis rather than the outpoints in the data. Just become more
familiar with the Data Series.

Further, one may not realize the ease with which one can acquire the knowledge
of an ideal scene. An outpoint is simply an illogical departure from the ideal
scene. By comparing the existing scene with the ideal scene, one easily sees the
outpoints.

To know the ideal scene, one has only to work out the correct products for it.
If these aren’t getting out, then there is a departure. One can then find the out-
points of the various types and then locate a Why and in that way open the door
to handling. And by handling, one is simply trying to get the scene to get out its
products.

Unless one proceeds in this fashion (from product back to establishment),
one can’t analyze much of anything. One merely comes up with errors.

The definition and nature of products is covered in several PLs and especially
in HCO PL 13 Mar. 72, PRODUCTION AND ESTABLISHMENT-—ORDERS
AND PRODUCTS, Esto Series 5.

An existing scene is as good as it gets out its products, not as good as it is
painted or carpeted or given public relations boosts.

So for ANY scene, manufacturing or fighting a war or being a hostess at a
party, there are PRODUCTS.

People who lead pointless lives are very unhappy people. Even the idler or
dilettante is happy only when he has a product!

There is always a product for any scene.

The analyst when he begins may get the wrong product. He may get a
doingness instead of something one can have. And he may look upon a half-
completion or half-done thing as a completed product.

All this makes his data analysis faulty. As he can’t figure out an ideal scene,
he then has nothing to compare the existing scene to. It is simply a matter of the
cost and time involved in not or half getting a product compared to the ideal
scene of a really valuable product with exchange value and what it takes to get it.
These two things can be worlds apart. The trail that leads to a Why that will

106
close the gap is plainly marked with one kind or another of outpoints. Where the
most and biggest are, there is the Why. Found, the real Why and actual handling
will move the existing toward ideal.

Hideously enough, what I say about products is true. Even a government
could have a product. Like “a prosperous happy country.” An intelligence
agency often muffs its product, such as “a properly briefed head of state.”’ But to
do it the head of state would have to have a product concerning other nations,
like “friendly, cooperative allies which are a help and no threat.” or some other
product. Otherwise the agency would wind up going straight out of the intelli-
gence business and being required to conduct its business by assassination of
foreign notables or other actions to do handlings based on wrong Whys.

As there would be no product, there could not really be an ideal scene. If
there is no ideal scene, then there is no way to compare the existing scene. Thus,
outpoints would expose situations but no Why would really be possible as there’s
no ideal scene to approach. One has often heard some agency or activity say,
‘““Where the hell are we going anyway?” Translated this would be, “We haven’t
had any ideal scene set up for us.” And translated further, “The policymakers
have no product in view.” So they aren’t going anyplace really and lack of an
objective would cause them to go down and lack of a product would cause them
to be miserable.

That’s the way life has been running.

Parents and others often ask children, “What will you do when you grow
up?” Or “What are you going to be?” This is not baffling for a 5-year-old,
perhaps, but it is a confuser for a child of 12. There are BE, DO and HAVE as
three major conditions of existence. One must BE in order to DO and DO in
order to HAVE. A product is the Have. It is not the DO. Most people give “Do”
as ‘‘product.” A product is a completed thing that has exchange value within or
outside the activity.

If one asked a 12-year-old, “What product are you going to make when you
grow up?” he’d likely give you the exchange reward as the answer, like “money.”
He has omitted a step. He has to have a product to exchange for money.

To “make money” directly he’d have to be the Secretary of the Treasury,
Superintendent of the Mint or a counterfeiter!

Only if you cleared up product and exchange with him could he begin to
answer the question about what’s what with growing up.

Let’s say this is done and he says he is set on making photographs of build-
ings. The DO now falls into line—he’d have to photograph things well. The BE
is obvious—architectural photographer. The exchange of architectural photo-
graphs for salary or fee is feasible if he is good.

So now we find he is a poor boy and no chance of schooling or even a box
camera. That’s the existing scene.

The ideal scene is a successful architectural photographer making pictures of
buildings.

107
You see the gap between the existing scene and the ideal scene.
Now you can follow back the outpoints and get a Why.

It isn’t just that he’s poor. That’s no Why as it opens no doors to get from
existing scene to ideal scene.

We investigate and find his “father” is very religious but an alcoholic and
that the boy is illegitimate and his “father” hates his guts.

So we find a Why that his “father,” much less helping him, is not about to
let him amount to anything whatever ever.

This opens a door.

Handling often requires a bright idea. And we find the local parson has often
shown interest in the boy so an obvious handling is to get the parson to persuade
the “father” to let the boy apprentice in the local photo store and tell the boy
what he has to do to make good there.

Situations cannot be handled well unless a real Why is found.

And a real Why cannot be found unless the product is named and an ideal
scene then stated. This compared to the existing scene gives us, really, the first
outpoint.

In going the other direction, to find a Why of sudden improvement, one has
to locate poor existing scenes that suddenly leap up toward ideal scenes. This is
done by locating a high product period (by stats or other signs of production) and
comparing IT as an ideal scene to the existing scenes before it (and just after if
there was a slump) and looking into that for a Why. But one is looking for plus-
points. And these lead to a real Why for the prosperity or improvement.

A “Who” will often be found. Like “James Johnny was shop foreman then.”
Well, he’s dead. So it’s not a Why as it leads nowhere. What did James Johnny
DO that was different? ‘““He got out products” leads nowhere. We keep looking
and we find he had a scheduling board and really kept it up-to-date and used it as
a single difference. Aha, “The Why is a kept-up scheduling board!” The handling
is to put a clerk on doing just that and hatting the current foreman to use it or
catch it. Result, up go the stats and morale. People can look at it and see what
they’re producing today and where they’re at!

So not all Whys are found by outpoints. The good situations are traced by
pluspoints.

If the high peak is current, one has to find a Why, in the same way, to
maintain it.

STANDARD ACTION

A beginner can juggle around and go badly adrift if he doesn’t follow the
pattern:

1. Work out exactly what the (person, unit, activity) should be producing.

108
. Work out the ideal scene.

. Investigate the existing scene.

. Follow outpoints back from ideal to existing.

. Locate the real Why that will move the existing toward ideal.

. Look over existing resources.

SI DBD HA FF W WN

. Get a bright idea of how to handle.
8. Handle or recommend handling so that it stays handled.
This is a very sure-fire approach.

If one just notes errors in a scene, with no product or ideal with which to
compare the existing scene, he will not be doing data analysis and situations will
deteriorate badly because he is finding wrong Whys.

THINKING

One has to be able to think with outpoints. A crude way of saying this is
“Jearn to think like an idiot.”” One could also add “‘without abandoning any
ability to think like a genius.”

If one can’t tolerate outpoints at all or confront them, one can’t see them.
A madman can’t tolerate pluspoints and he doesn’t see them either.

But there can be a lot of pluspoints around and no production. Thus, one can
be told how great it all is while the place edges over to the point of collapse.

An evaluator who listens to people on the scene and takes their Whys runs a
grave risk. If these were the Whys, then things would be better.

A far safer way is to talk only insofar as finding what the product is con-
cerned and investigating.

One should observe the existing scene through data or through observers or
through direct observation.

An evaluator often has to guess what the Why might be. It is doing that
which brings up the phrase “Learn to think like an idiot.” The Why will be
found at the end of a trail of outpoints. Each one is an aberration when compared
to the ideal scene. The biggest idiocy which then explains all the rest and which
opens the door to improvement toward the ideal scene is the Why.

One also has to learn to think like a genius with pluspoints.

Get the big peak period of production (now or in the past). Compare it to the
existing scene just before.

Now find the pluspoints that were entered in. Trace these and you arrive at
the Why as the biggest pluspoint that opened the door to improvement.

But once more one considers resources available and has to get a bright idea.

109
So it is the same series of steps as above but with pluspoints.

VETERAN

A veteran evaluator can toss off evaluations in an hour or two, mainly based
on how long it takes him to dig up data.

A big tough situation may require days and days.

Sometimes luck plays a role in it. The data that was the key to it was being
sat on by someone not skilled in the subject and who had no idea of relative
importances. Sometimes the datum pops up like toast from an electric toaster.
Sometimes one has it all wrapped up and then suddenly a new outpoint or plus-
point appears that changes the whole view of the evaluator.

Example: A firm’s blacklist has just been published in a newspaper as a
scandal. Evaluator: “They do what?” in a voice of incredulity. “They ship their
security files to Memphis in open crates? Because they are saving on postage?”
Wrath could dangerously shoot a wrong somebody. The idiocy is not believable.
But a new datum leads to personnel who hired a reporter in disguise because it
no longer requires or looks up references.

Example: Situation where stats soared. “They used schoolchildren to pass
out literature?” That’s just a point but a strange one. Turns out they also hired a
cashier and had NEVER HAD ONE ON POST BEFORE! Why? Nobody to take
money.

Man gets dedicated to his own pet theories very easily. A true scientist
doesn’t fixate on one idea. He keeps looking until he finds it, not until his pet
theory is proven. That’s the test of an evaluator.

STATISTICS
One always runs by statistics where these are valid.

Statistics must reflect actual desired PRODUCT. If they do not, they are not
valid. If they do, they give an idea of ideal scene.

From a statistic reflecting the desired products, one can work out the departure
from the ideal scene.

A backlog of product production must reflect in a stat. As a backlog is
negative production.

From such tools an evaluator can work.

The use of data analysis is relatively easy compared to learning a musical
instrument.

You have the hang of how it is done.

So why not just be a veteran right now and DO IT.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

110
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 12 JUNE 1972R
Remimeo REVISED 24 JUNE 1988

Data Series 26R
Establishment Officer Series 18R

LENGTH OF TIME TO EVALUATE

It will be found that long times required to do an evaluation can be traced
each time to AN INDIVIDUAL WHY FOR EACH EVALUATOR.

These, however, can be summarized into the following classes of Whys:

This list is assessed by a Scientology auditor on a meter. The handling directions
given in each case are designations for auditing actions as done by a Scientology
auditor and are given in the symbols he would use. Where two separate sets of
handling instructions appear under a question, the handling in the first bracket is
the one done directly in the session. The handling in the second bracket shows
the further actions to be done outside of session, or as programed by the C/S.

This list is not to be done in the middle of a major case action or Int Repair
or handling, or any other case action that would be interrupted by flying ruds.
And, if not already done, ruds must be flown prior to this assessment. (Ref:
HCOB 24 Sept. 79RA, FLYING RUDS IN CRAMMING) These rules apply
regardless of whether the list is being done by an auditor as part of a pc’s pro-
gram or being done in Cramming.

1. MISUNDERSTOOD WORDS?

(Handled with Word Clearing [using Method 1, Method 4,
Method 2 and Method 9 of the Word Clearing Series].)

2. INABILITY TO STUDY AND AN INABILITY TO LEARN THE
MATERIALS?
(2WC E/S to F/N.)
(Program for a Study Green Form, HCOB 4 May 81RA.)

3. OUTPOINTS IN OWN THINKING?

(Handled by what is called an HC [Hubbard Consultant] List,
HCOB 28 Aug. 70ORB, HC OUTPOINT-PLUSPOINT LISTS
RB.)

4. PERSONAL OUT-ETHICS?

(Use HCO PL 3 May 72R, ETHICS AND EXECUTIVES, by
an auditor. Has two Listing and Nulling type lists.)

111
10.

13.

DOING SOMETHING ELSE?

(2-way comm on HCO PL 3 May 72R, ETHICS AND
EXECUTIVES, or reorganization.)

IMPATIENT OR BORED WITH READING?

(2WC E/S to F/N.)

(Program for Hubbard Key to Life Course, as released, to
make him able to comprehend with clarity things that are read,
written and heard. Then have him achieve Super-Literacy. LRH
Executive Directive 178 International.)

DON’T KNOW HOW TO READ STATISTICS SO DON’T KNOW
WHERE TO BEGIN?

(2WC E/S to F/N.)

(Learn to read stats from Management by Stat PLs.)

DON’T KNOW THE SCENE?

(2WC E/S to F/N.)

(Achieve familiarity by direct observation.)

DO YOU READ ON AND ON BECAUSE YOU DON’T KNOW
HOW TO HANDLE AND ARE STALLING?

(Handled with Crashing Mis-U Finding per HCOB 17 June 79,
CRASHING MIS-Us: THE KEY TO COMPLETED CYCLES
OF ACTION AND PRODUCTS.)

(Get him drilled on actual handling. Program for the Hubbard
Key to Life Course, as released. Then have him become
Super-Literate. )

AFRAID TO TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
CONSEQUENCES IF WRONG?
(HCOB 10 May 72, on robotism. Apply it.)

FALSELY REPORTING?
(Pull all withholds and harmful acts on the subject.)

ASSUME THE WHY BEFORE STARTING?

(Handled with False Data Stripping and Crashing Mis-U
Finding on the Data Series. If a service facsimile manifests
during Crashing Mis-U Finding, handle it per HCOB 23 Aug.
79 1, CRASHING MIS-Us, BLOCKS TO FINDING THEM.)

(Program for Grade IV service facsimile handling Quad, per
HCOB 6 Sept. 78 II, ROUTINE THREE SC-A, FULL
SERVICE FACSIMILE HANDLING UPDATED WITH NEW
ERA DIANETICS, or if done previously, verify.)

FEEL STUPID ABOUT IT?

(2WC E/S to F/N.)

(Get IQ raised by general processing.)

112
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

OTHER INTENTIONS?
(2WC E/S to F/N.)
(Audit on L11 or False Purpose Rundown.)

DO YOU HAVE OTHER REASONS NOT COVERED IN ABOVE?
(Listing and Nulling to blowdown F/N item on the list.)

DO YOU HAVE WITHHOLDS ABOUT IT?

(Get them off.)

DO YOU HAVE OVERTS IN THE AREA YOU ARE TRYING TO
EVALUATE?

(Pull all overts on the area.)

DO YOU HAVE OVERTS ON LRH TECH?
(Pull all overts on LRH tech.)

HAVE YOU HAD WRONG REASONS FOUND?
(C/S Series 78.)

NOT INTERESTED IN SUCCESS?
(Use HCO PL 3 May 72R, ETHICS AND EXECUTIVES, and
follow as in 14 above.)

HAVE YOU HAD TROUBLE WITH CRAMMING?
(Handled with a Cramming Repair Assessment List.)

ARE YOU CONFUSED?

(Handled with a Cramming Repair Assessment List to correct
faulty rejects.)

ARE YOU DESPERATE?

(Handled with a Cramming Repair Assessment List to correct
faulty rejects.)

DO YOU JUST HAVE TROUBLE COMPLETING THE EVAL?
(Handled with Crashing Mis-U Finding in the area of
difficulty.)

CAN’T THINK WITH THE DATA SERIES?

(Handled with Word Clearing and False Data Stripping on the
Data Series.)

DO YOU KEEP ACCEPTING FALSE DATA?

(2WC E/S to FIN.)

(Susceptibility to false data is often due to O/Ws, so program
for a Confessional on that subject or area first, and then
FDSing.)

113
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

HAVE YOU RECEIVED VERBAL TECH?

(Find out what and handle with the Verbal Tech Checklist [per
HCO PL 9 Feb. 79R II, HOW TO DEFEAT VERBAL TECH
CHECKLIST], Word Clearing and False Data Stripping on the
Data Series, relevant materials and OEC.)

HAS ANYBODY TOLD YOU SOMETHING ABOUT EVALUATING
THAT YOU YOURSELF HAVEN’T BEEN ABLE TO THINK WITH?

(2WC E/S to F/N. Then handled with the Verbal Tech
Checklist [per HCO PL 9 Feb. 79R II], HOW TO DEFEAT
VERBAL TECH CHECKLIST], Word Clearing and False Data
Stripping on the Data Series.)

HAVE YOU HEARD ANYTHING ABOUT THE DATA SERIES
THAT WASN’T IN THE DATA SERIES?

(2WC E/S to F/N. Then handled with the Verbal Tech
Checklist [per HCO PL 9 Feb. 79R II, HOW TO DEFEAT
VERBAL TECH CHECKLIST], Word Clearing and False Data
Stripping on the Data Series.)

HAVE YOU READ ANYTHING ABOUT EVALUATION THAT
WASN’T IN THE LRH ISSUES?

(2WC E/S to F/N. Then handled with the Verbal Tech

Checklist [per HCO PL 9 Feb. 79R II, HOW TO DEFEAT
VERBAL TECH CHECKLIST], Word Clearing and False Data
Stripping on the Data Series.)

DO YOU FIND ANYTHING DISAGREEABLE ABOUT EVALUATING?
(2WC E/S to F/N. Then handled with Word Clearing and False
Data Stripping on the Data Series.)

IS THERE ANYTHING ABOUT THE DATA SERIES THAT

YOU’RE IN DISAGREEMENT WITH?

(2WC E/S to F/N. Find the misunderstood words in the Data
Series connected with the answer he has given and then do
False Data Stripping. )

(If needed, program for a Disagreement Check per HCOB 22
Mar. 72RA, DISAGREEMENT CHECK.)

DO YOU BELIEVE EVALUATION CAN BE DONE?

(2WC E/S to F/N.)

IS SOMETHING MORE IMPORTANT THAN EVALUATION?
(List and null “What is more important than evaluation?” to
blowdown F/N item on the list.)

CAN’T YOU EVALUATE THE AREA?

(2WC E/S to F/N.)

(Have him write up O/Ws on the area he is trying to evaluate
or any related area, per HCO PL 2 Mar. 84, O/W WRITE-
UPS, and have them meter-checked for completeness. )

114
36. DO YOU HAVE TROUBLE DRAWING CONCLUSIONS FROM
OUTPOINTS?

(Handled with False Data Stripping.)

(Program for the HC OUTPOINT-PLUSPOINT LISTS [HCOB

28 Aug. 7ORB], and the False Data Rundown [when released].)
37. CAN’T RECOGNIZE AN OUTPOINT?

(Handled with Word Clearing and False Data Stripping on the
Data Series.)

(Get him drilled on spotting outpoints and learning to think
backwards per Data Series 43R, EVALUATION AND
PROGRAMS.)

38. (TO BE ASSESSED ON POSTED EVALUATORS ONLY):
HAVE YOU ASSIGNED YOURSELF TARGETS ON EVALS
OTHER THAN THE 4 FINAL TARGETS?

(2WC E/S to F/N.)
(Get him hatted or retreaded on the duties of his post.)
39. DO YOU HAVE TROUBLE WITH INVESTIGATORY
PROCEDURE?
(Handled with Word Clearing and False Data Stripping on
relevant Data Series PLs.)
40. SOME OTHER REASON?
(Find it by 2WC.)

41. NO TROUBLE IN THE FIRST PLACE?
(Indicate it to person.)

When this list is assessed, one can easily spot why the person is having
trouble with the Data Series or applying it. When these reasons are handled, one
can then get the series restudied and word cleared and restudied and it will be
found that evaluations are much easier to do and much more rapidly done.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
Revision assisted by

LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

115
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 25 MAY 1973

Remimeo

Data Series 27

SUPPLEMENTARY EVALUATIONS

(Star-rate al] evaluators)

If one knows how to evaluate an existing scene correctly (which means by
the purest and most exacting application of the Data Series) and still does not
achieve an improvement toward the ideal scene, several things may be the reason.

First amongst these is of course poor evaluation. Second would be a consider-
able disagreement in the evaluated scene with the Why, especially if it is interpreted
as condemnatory. Third would be a failure to obtain actual compliance with the
targets in the evaluation. Fourth would be interference points or areas which,
although affecting the scene being evaluated, are not looked at in relationship to it.

In any scene being evaluated, there are two areas which are not likely to get
much attention from the evaluator as they may not be remarked on in any of the
reports or data being used in his evaluation. These two types of area are (1)
LOCAL ENVIRONMENT and (2) RELAY POINTS AND LINES BETWEEN
POLICY AND ORDER SOURCE AND THE SCENE ITSELF.

These two areas may be looked at as (1) the plane upon which the scene
exists and (2) the upper stages of authority under which the scene reacts.

THE LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

The surrounding area to the scene being evaluated in the matter or a person
would be the general third dynamic or other dynamic in which he or she lives his
day-to-day life and which influences the person and therefore influences his hat
or post. The search for the Why which exactly causes Joe or Joanna to fail to
hold post or wear a hat and which when handled will greatly better Joe or Joanna
may well be their reactions to environments at their level and which may be or
may not be there with them. Family or distant friends, not visible to an evaluator,
or the work environment or on-the-job friends of Joe or Joanna may greatly
influence Joe or Joanna.

This might prove too inviting for the evaluator to blame environment for the
state of the existing scene and a caution would have to be introduced: that any
Why must lead to a bettered scene and must not just explain it.

EVAL BY RELAY POINTS

Thus, in such a problem it should be understood that one has TWO existing

116
scenes, one, the person and two, his environment; that they interrelate does
not make them just one scene. Thus two evaluations about Joe or Joanna are
possible, each with its program. To go about it otherwise is likely to prove as
unsuccessful as the original evaluation of the person. Life and orders are reach-
ing Joe or Joanna through relay points which are not ordinarily taken into con-
sideration. Thus those areas should be separately evaluated. Usually, in the case
of a person, something would have to be done to those areas, on the same plane
as the person, by the person himself. So the program might include what the
person himself could do about them.

The local environment of a material object, such as a machine or an office
or a vehicle, may also be evaluated as well as the machine or the office or vehicle
itself.

In short, there are relay points of difficulties that produce situations, on the
same plane as the person or thing being evaluated. And these make ADDI-
TIONAL evaluations possible and often profitable to the evaluator in terms of
bettered ideal scenes. Yet at first glance, or using only the usual reports, it may
seem that there is only one situation, such as the person himself.

Completely in the interests of justice, it is unfair to put down a target in
some greater area situation like ‘““Remove Joe.” It may well be that stats did go
down when Joe was appointed to a post. Well, that may be perfectly true. But by
only then evaluating Joe and not the greater zone of Joe’s personal scenes, one
may very well come up with a very wrong and abrupt and unjust target. WHO in
other words, when found, may not solve the scene at all even when one only
targets it as “specially train” or “audit” without removal. There may be another
scene that is having an effect on Joe which, if not evaluated properly with a
proper program of its own, will make nonsense out of any program about Joe
himself related only to his post or position. Another scene may be relaying fatality
to Joe which if unhandled will unsuit him to any other post of any other kind.

Thus Joe and Joanna would have, each of them, TWO or more full evalua-
tions possible. What the person is failing at or not doing on the job may have a
plain enough Why that can be corrected by programing and moved to an ideal
scene or at least toward it. What is hitting the person at an environmental or
familial or social level might be an entirely different situation, requiring its own
evaluation, with a proper Why and program for Joe or Joanna to carry out them-
selves or even with some help from others.

In a broader case, we have, let us say, an organization or division that is in a
situation. One, of course, can evaluate it as itself, finding a proper Why and a
nice bright idea and a program. And one can also do a second evaluation of the
local environment. This might be the society or an adjacent division or even
another organization. And this will require the location of a situation and finding
its Why and working out a program to handle that can be done by the org or the
division itself or with help from outside.

The local environment outside the scene being evaluated is then a proper
subject for another evaluation.

It is a serious error to only evaluate the local environment as all too often the
person or org or division will insist that that is the ONLY situation and also that

117
it is totally beyond any remedy by their own actions. Thus, if the evaluator is
going to evaluate the local environment of a subject that is in a situation, he does
it AFTER he has evaluated the subject on its own ground totally.

EVALUATION OF ECHELONS

On any command or communication channel there are always a certain num-
ber of points extending from source through relay points down to the final
receipt- or action-point. These may be very numerous. Some may be beyond the
authority of any evaluator. But each is capable of having ITS OWN SITUATION
that will cause an evaluation of the receipt- or action-point to fail.

These can be called “echelons” or step-like formations. The receipt- or
action-point that is to comply finally with the program may be the subject of
hidden sources of effect in the relay points of any program or order.

Thus, as in the case of a dangerous decline of some activity somewhere, an
evaluator has several evaluations possible and probably necessary.

It would be, by experience, a severe error to try to evaluate all these differ-
ent scenes (such as many echelons each in a different area) in one evaluation and
find a Why for the lot, as one is attempting to find a single Why for several
different scenes in different places which violates the strict purity of evaluation
procedure.

One may find the exact and correct Why for the point of action and do a
splendid program only to find that somehow it didn’t come off or didn’t last. Yet
it was the right Why for that scene. Hidden from view is the influence on that
scene from one or more upper echelons which have, themselves, an individual
situation and need their own Why and their own program. Only then can the
influence on the action-point be beneficial in its entirety.

There is a system by which this is done.

1. One recognizes that there is a situation in an area which has not re-
sponded well to previous evaluation or has not maintained any benefit
received very long.

2. One realizes that there are several echelons above the point being eval-
uated.

3. One draws these points without omission. This makes a sort of graph or
command chart. It includes every command or comm relay point above
the level of the point being evaluated.

4. The points, if any, BELOW the point under consideration as in (1) above
are then added to the chart below it.

5. One now undertakes a brief study of EACH of these points above and
below to see if any have a situation of its own that could influence the
success or failure of the original point evaluated as in (1) above.

6. One does a full separate evaluation of each of these echelon points
where any situation seems to exist. Each of the evaluations done must

118
have its own local situation, Why and program. Care is taken not to
evaluate ‘“‘no situations.” Care is also taken to keep this SERIES of eval-
uations consistent with the main idea of remedying (1) above.

7. The evaluations are released as a series and executed as feasible.

In doing such a series, brand-new data may leap out as to the interrelation-
ship of all these relay points and this may bring about a recommendation for a
change of organization requiring new policy. But this would be another evalua-
tion entirely as it is in effect an evaluation of basic organizational policy and may
even require that tech be issued or withdrawn.

Take a case where the area which has not bettered or sustained a betterment
has in actual fact two echelons below it and six above. The area, let us say, is a
continental management office of an international hotel] chain. Below it are its
state offices and below that the hotels on that continent. Above it is the interna-
tional comm relay center, the international headquarters executive at international
headquarters for that continent, above that the international management organi-
zation, above that the chief executive of the international management organiza-
tion, above that the advisers to the board and above that the board itself.

By drawing these out as a series of echelons, one sees that there is poten-
tially a series of eight evaluations in addition to the main evaluation of that
continental office which is where the situation originally was. By scanning over
all these eight other influencing areas, one may find one or more of them which
have situations of real influence on the origina] evaluation subject.

One then evaluates separately and handles separately WHILE STILL GO-
ING ON HANDLING THE ORIGINAL SUBJECT.

One can then also do the local environment evaluation of the original subject
if there seems to be a Situation there.

No evaluation is done where there is no situation. But one should assert in a
covering note to the series that there are no known situations in the remaining
points.

Doing a series of evaluations and local environment evaluations can be ex-
tremely fruitful only so long as one realizes that they comprise separate situations
which only by their influence are preventing an ideal scene from being achieved
in the original area where betterment cannot be attained or maintained.

Supplementary evaluations, when necessary and when done, can rescue a

long series of apparently fruitless evaluations of a subject and move the evaluator
himself toward a more ideal and happier scene of success.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

119
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 SEPTEMBER 1973R

Remimeo Issue I
REVISED 22 JUNE 1975

Data Series 28R

CHECKING EVALS

In checking over the evaluations of others, there is no substitute for following
the hard and fast rule of insisting upon:

a. Purity of evaluation

b. Consistency

c. Workability

d. Authenticity of the data.

There are no small rules. To quote one of these, “The Situation is the direct
opposite of the Ideal Scene.” This is not necessarily true and is not a precise
definition. A Situation is the most major departure from the Ideal Scene. That’s
purity by definition.

A Why is not necessarily opposite to an Ideal Scene. But it is of the same
order of thing.

Example: Stat of income divided by staff sunk to 15 cents.

Ideal Scene: Staff producing under competent management.

Sit: Execs not coming to work.

Why: The ED has forbidden any exec to be paid.

If you look this over it is consistent. But it is not reversals or opposites.

The stat found the area, the Ideal Scene was easy. Search of data found the
Sit as the biggest departure. Further search found the Why. Further search and
knowledge of the existing scene would get a bright idea (which would not be
sacking the ED who is probably the only one coming to work, but more likely
getting the ED and execs into a Hello-Okay session and resolve their hates and
ordering execs be paid at once).

THE COMMON BUG
(Orders of Day item 24 Feb. 75)

“I found that getting the Sit was a common bug. Evidently people don’t do a
real Stat Analysis and get an Ideal Scene, look for its furthest departure and get
the Sit and then look for data and find the Why.

120
“There are many ways to go about it but the above is easy, simple and fool-
proof.

“Tt would look like this on a worksheet:

“GDS analysis to find the area and a conditional guess.

“Ideal Scene for that area.
“Biggest depart from it for the SITUATION.
“Stats

Data

Outpoint Counts

Why

Ethics Why

Who

Ideal Scene

Handling
Bright Idea.

“Tf you’re very good your GDS analysis will get confirmed by data.
“The real Why opens the door to handling.

“And you can handle.

“This doesn’t change eval form. It’s just a working model.

“All good evals are very consistent—all on same railroad track. Not pies, sea
lions, spaceships. But pies, apples, flour, sugar, stoves.

“T think evaluators get dispersed and Q-and-A with data, lacking any guide-
line. And so take a near forever.

“ast one I did, the GDS analysis gave the whole scene and then it got
confirmed, all on the same outline as above. That org is still booming!

“Tt took 6% hours, including doing the majority of the targets!

“It doesn’t take days or weeks, much less months!

“Tt takes hours.”

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

121
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 SEPTEMBER 1973-1
Remimeo ADDITION OF 20 MARCH 1977

Data Series 28R-1

CHECKING EVALUATIONS
ADDITION

(This policy letter was compiled from a series of notes written by LRH in
reviewing evaluations in 1976. It is being issued for use by evaluators and
personnel who critique evaluations. —CS])

MULTIPLE SITUATIONS

Evaluators can be on a “whole org” kick where the evaluation must handle
the whole org. Evidence of this is the Why lately was defined (by someone else)
as something that handled all outpoints. The initial step of the stat analysis to
find the area and then find its situation and its Why is not being done. Hence,
individual org situations do not get spotted or evaluated and evaluations take
forever.

A situation is something that affects stats or survival of the org. An outpoint
is something that contributes to a situation and should not be in the situation
area. A Why is the real basic reason for the situation which, being found, opens
the door to handling. Evaluators who are trying to embrace the whole org or
world in one evaluation are missing all the real situations or landing only in
Division 7.

An evaluation can have “philosophical Whys,” such as: “The CO and HCO
have prevented execs from being made by omitting actions that would accomplish
this (i.e., choosing suitable ones, hatting, training and apprenticing them) which
has led to blows and the 19th-century solution of transfers and removals and
eventually no execs at all.” That’s all fine but you can ask of it, “How come
they’re doing that?” so it couldn’t be a bottom-level Why. Anytime you can ask a
“How come?” you haven’t got a Why, you have a situation.

Just an off-the-cuff Why better than that would be, “Day and Foundation
staff are the same, allowing no time to hat and train” or another, “There is no
HCO staff” or another, “Only a handful make the GI and the rest of the org is
considered superfluous” —yet none of these are the Why either as you can also
again ask “How come?”

The new type of evaluation would use telex lines and FRs to ask a lot of
questions AFTER one had found the real situation. It would go: Find the situa-
tion area from stats, find the situation from data files, get some sort of a Why
(that will now become the situation) and burn the telex lines or send a mission

122
from the FOLO to find out how come that situation. You would then get the real
Why and could do a program. This would make evaluations pretty real!

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Assisted by

Admin Training Lineup
Sortout I/C

123
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 SEPTEMBER 1973-2
Remimeo ADDITION OF 2 OCTOBER 1977

Data Series 28R-2

MULTIPLE SIT EVAL FORMAT

(Compiled from AO 536-10 and FMO 1672
as the proper format per direction
from LRH as given in ED 270 FB)

For multiple situation evaluations, the following is the correct format to use
in the final evaluation write-up:

SITUATION ONE
POLICY:
SITUATION:
STATS:
DATA:
OUTPOINT COUNT:
PLUSPOINT COUNT: (As applicable)
WHY:
ETHICS WHY: (As applicable)
WHO: (As applicable)
IDEAL SCENE:

HANDLING: (For a multiple sit eval, the plan is written here, e.g.—
“HANDLING: Find and train executives . . .” etc.)

SITUATION TWO
POLICY:
(And so on, as per above)

The above format is repeated for as many situations as were evaluated.

124
Then:

PROGRAM

. (First target)

. (Second target)

And so on.

The program targets to specifically handle the Whys of each situation should

be divided up as follows:

19,

20.
21.

SITUATION ONE TARGETS

. (Or whatever number, in sequence, after any beginning general targets) Make

up alist. .

. Go through the org . . .

. Go and see...
(Etc.)
SITUATION TWO TARGETS
(Or whatever number, in sequence, following the Sit One targets) See

that...
Cali on .
Get the...
(Etc.)
One does this for as many situations as were evaluated.

When writing and issuing a set of program orders or mission orders separate

to the eval itself, the usual program or mission order format is used, except the
operating targets get divided up as shown above.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Assisted by
AVU Verifications Chief

125
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 30 SEPTEMBER 1973

Remimeo Issue I

Data Series 29

OUTPOINTS, MORE

I recently surveyed a number of possible new outpoints. Almost all of them
were simply the basic outpoints in a different guise and needed no special category.

However, two new outpoints did emerge that are in addition to the basic
number.

The new outpoints are:

ADDED TIME. In this outpoint we have the reverse of dropped time. In
added time we have, as the most common example, something taking longer than
it possibly could. To this degree it is a version of conflicting data = something
takes three weeks to do but it is reported as taking six months. But added time
must be called to attention as an outpoint in its own right for there is a tendency
to be reasonable about it and not see that it IS an outpoint in itself.

In its most severe sense, added time becomes a very serious outpoint when,
for example, two or more events occur at the same moment involving, let us say,
the same person who could not have experienced both. Time had to be ADDED
to the physical universe for the data to be true. Like this: “I left for Saigon at
midnight on April 2Ist, 1962, by ship from San Francisco.” “I took over my
duties at Saigon on April 30th, 1962.” Here we have to add time to the physical
universe for both events to occur as a ship would take two or three weeks to get
from San Francisco to “Saigon.”

Another instance, a true occurrence and better example of added time, hap-
pened when I once sent a checklist of actions it would take a month to complete
to a junior executive and received compliance in full in the next return mail. The
checklist was in her hands only one day! She would have had to add 29 days to
the physical universe for the compliance report to be true. This is also dropped
time on her part.

ADDED INAPPLICABLE DATA. Just plain added data does not necessarily
constitute an outpoint. It may be someone being thorough. But when the data is
in no way applicable to the scene or situation and is added it is a definite out-
point. Example: Long, long reams of data on an eval write-up, none of which is
giving any clue to the outpoints on the scene. By actual survey it was found that
the person doing it did not know any Why (not having used outpoints to find it)
and was just stalling.

Often added data is put there to cover up neglect of duty or mask a real
situation. It certainly means the person is obscuring something.

126
Usually added data also contains other types of outpoints like wrong target
or added time.

In using this outpoint be very sure you also understand the word inapplicable
and see that it is only an outpoint if the data itself does not apply to the subject
at hand.

There is more about another already named outpoint:

WRONG SOURCE. This is the opposite direction from wrong target.

An example would be a president of the United States in 1973 using the
opinions and congratulations of Soviet leaders to make his point with American

voters.

A more common version of this, not unknown in intelligence report grading
for probability, would be a farmer in Iowa reporting a Mexican battleship on
Mud Creek. The farmer would be a wrong source for accurate naval reports.

A private taking an order from a sergeant that countermands an order he had
from a lieutenant would be an example of wrong source.

What is sometimes called a “Hey You” “organization” is one that takes orders
from anyone = a repeating outpoint of wrong source.

There are many examples of this outpoint. It must be included as a very

important outpoint on its own. It produces a chaos of illogical ideas and actions
when present.

PLUSPOINTS
CORRECT TIME or the expected time period is a pluspoint.
ADEQUATE DATA is a pluspoint.
APPLICABLE DATA is a pluspoint.
CORRECT SOURCE is a pluspoint.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

127
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 30 SEPTEMBER 1973
Remimeo Issue II

Data Series 30

SITUATION FINDING

There is an ironbound rule in handling things:

WHERE YOU FIND OUTPOINTS,
YOU WILL THERE ALSO FIND A SITUATION.

If several outpoints come to view in any scene (or even one), if you look
further you will find a situation.

There is not any real art to finding situations if you can see outpoints.

The sequence is simple. (1) You see some outpoints in a scene, (2) you in-
vestigate and “pull a few strings” (meaning follow down a chain of outpoints)
and (3) you will find a situation, and (4) then you can evaluate.

Statistics are leaders in pointing the way. They should be X, they are not X.
That is conflicting data. Behind that you will find a situation.

If anyone has any trouble finding situations, then one of three things is true:
(a) he cannot recognize outpoints when he sees them, (b) he does not have any
concept of the ideal scene or want it, or (c) he does not know how to pull strings,
which is to say ask for or look for data.

On the positive side, to find situations one has to (A) be able to recognize
outpoints, (B) has to have some idea of an ideal scene and want it, and (C) has to
be able to “pull strings.”

Evaluation is very much simpler when you realize that the art lies in finding
situations. To then find a Why is of course only a matter of counting outpoints
and recognizing what (that can be handled) is retarding the achievement of a
more ideal scene.

REASONABLENESS

One often wonders why people are so “reasonable” about intolerable and
illogical situations.

The answer is very simple: they cannot recognize outpoints when they see
them and so try to make everything seem logical.

The ability to actually see an outpoint for what it is, in itself is an ability to
attain some peace of mind. For one can realize it is what it is, an outpoint. It is
not a matter for human emotion and reaction. It is a pointer toward a situation.

128
The moment you can see this you will be able to handle life a lot better.

The human reaction is to REACT! to an outpoint. And then get “reason-
able” and adopt some explanation for it, usually untrue.

You can safely say that “being reasonable” is a symptom of being unable to
recognize outpoints for what they are and use them to discover actual situations.

NATIVE THINK

It may come as a surprise or no surprise at all that the ability to evaluate as
given in this Data Series is not necessarily native to a being.

In a native state a being detests illogic and rejects it. He seldom uses it for
any other purposes than humor or showing up a rival in debate as a fool or using
it in justice or a court of law to prove the other side wrong or guilty.

A being is dedicated to being logical and he does, usually, a wonderful job
of it.

But when he encounters illogic, he often feels angry or frustrated or helpless.
He has not, so far as I know, ever used illogic as a systematic tool for thinking.

Certain obsolete efforts to describe man’s thinking processes stressed “asso-
ciative thought” and various other mechanisms to prove man a fully logical
“animal.” The moment they tried to deal with illogic, they assigned it to aberration
and sought drugs, tortures or executions that would “cure it.” None of them ever
thought of using illogic as a tool of rational thinking! Thus they did not advance
anyone’s intelligence and conceived intelligence as unchangeable and fixed.

The only Greek school of philosophy that dealt with illogic was the Sophist
school. But even they had no real idea of the illogic. They were employed by
politicians to make their political acts seem reasonable!

Even humorists have no real idea of illogic. Reading their ideas of the theory
of humor shows them to be off the mark. They don’t really know what is “funny.”

Laughter is rejection, actually.

And humor you will find usually deals with one or another outpoint put in
such a way that the reader or audience can reject it.

The groan of most humorists is that too often their hearers go reasonable on
them. PAT: “Who was that hobo I saw you with last night?” MIKE: “That
wasn’t no oboe, that was my fife.” LISTENER (puzzled): “But maybe it was a
very slender hobo.”

The tendency of a being is to try to keep it reasonable, logical, rational. And
that is of course a very praiseworthy impulse or all life’s endeavors might un-
hinge.

The fear of being illogical is a secret fear of being crazy or insane. (Not an

129
idle fear when psychiatry was roaming around loose.) Or at the least being
thought a fool or dullard or at the very very least, unworldly and uneducated.

To evaluate and be a fine evaluator is to be able to prevent a slump toward a
painful collapse. And to be able to steer the way from the nonideal present to the
ideal future.

A person who feels queasy about his sanity really doesn’t dare look at out-
points or confront and use illogic. Yet it is the way to full sanity itself.

The ability to evaluate puts one at cause over both the mad and ideal. It
places a being at a height it is unlikely he has ever before enjoyed in the realm of
commanding the situations of life.

Evaluation is a new way to think.

It is very worthwhile to acquire such an ability as it is doubtful if it ever
before has been achieved.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

130
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 25 NOVEMBER 1973

Remimeo Issue |

Data Series 31

FINAL TARGETS

The first, foremost and most usual reason evaluations fail is because the
programs to handle are not done.

The evaluator, with all the study for an Ideal Scene, the exhaustive search for
data and the collection and count of outpoints and pluspoints, with the discovery
thereafter of the right Why and the brightest of ideas to handle may yet be totally
defeated by the simple fact that no one ever chases up the target execution and
gets the program really and honestly DONE.

He can even have someone who is responsible for getting his program
executed only to find they are themselves issuing additional or even contrary orders.
Or even issuing whole new programs which have no relation to evaluation at all.

Circumstances have been found where a person with the duty of getting tar-
gets done was so deficient in the ability to confront that he accepted any excuse
at all and was even pushed over into other subjects. The remedy for this of course
is HCOB 21 Nov. 73, THE CURE OF Q&A, MAN’S DEADLIEST DISEASE.

It can be so bad that persons entrusted with target execution did not even
speak to or approach any person who had a target to do while not reporting at all
or reporting marvelous progress with the program!

So, sad to have to relate, it is not enough to be a fantastic and able evaluator.
If the program is never truly done, the evaluation is merely a mental exercise.

The ability to supervise and obtain cooperation and execution is mandatory
for the skill of any evaluator.

HCO PL | Sept. 73, ADMIN KNOW-HOW NO. 30 and HCO PL 15 Oct.
73, AKH Series 31, ADMINISTRATIVE SKILL, give the evaluator some of the
additional data he needs to obtain execution of his programs.

One can say right here that the thought, “Oh well, I’m just a sort of techni-
cian here and it’s really not up to me to RUN things. I just evaluate and it’s up
to ‘them’ to see that they carry it out,” is very likely to occur.

But if one’s repute as an evaluator is to be established, it will come about
because:

THE EXISTING SCENE MOVED UP MARKEDLY TOWARD
OR BECAME THE IDEAL SCENE.

If that does not occur, then seniors or workers don’t blame the supervisors or

131
communicators. They blame the evaluator. “Oh him! He evaluated the building
situation and look, the whole situation went to hell.”

No justice at all. The Data and Why and all the rest were quite right. The
on-paper evaluation was perfect. It would have ‘‘handled the hell” out of it. But
lamentably the program just was never done. Altered or falsely reported or un-
touched, the targets just weren’t done.

So the test of an evaluation is:

DID IT MOVE THE EXISTING SCENE TOWARD OR AT-
TAIN THE IDEAL SCENE?

And that cannot occur without the program being fully and totally and cor-
rectly done.

See also HCO PL 26 Jan. 72, NOT-DONES, HALF-DONES AND BACK-
LOGS, for more data on this.

Thus it is VITAL that four final targets exist on every evaluation.
These are:

_______ (Fourth from last number of the evaluation program.) Verify from
personal inspection of the existing evidence or the scene itself
that every target has been fully done without omission, alteration,
falsehood or exaggerated reports.

EVALUATOR

(Third from last number of the evaluation program.) Look at cur-
rent statistics and the results of the above inspection and the SIT-
UATION of this evaluation as written above AND SEE IF THE
SITUATION IS NO LONGER A THREAT.

EVALUATOR —__

(Second from last number of the evaluation program.) Look
again at the IDEAL SCENE as written above. Then look at the
above two targets and further investigate and SEE IF THE IDEAL
SCENE HAS NOW BEEN APPROACHED MORE CLOSELY
OR ATTAINED.

EVALUATOR

______ (Last numbered target of the evaluation program.) (A) If the
above three targets do not show a favorable approach toward or
attainment of the IDEAL SCENE, gather new data, investigate
further and REEVALUATE, or (B) If the IDEAL SCENE has
been more closely approached or attained, the following com-
mendations or awards are assigned:

EVALUATOR

132
This signifies the conclusion of the evaluation.

(Note: The last four targets may be made available on a mimeograph sheet
for the use of an evaluator in ending off his evaluation.)

By using this program ending, it is abundantly clear to all those concerned
with the evaluation including the evaluator that:

THE PROGRAM AND ITS SUCCESSFUL EXECUTION
ARE AN INTEGRAL PART OF AN EVALUATION.

Unless the program is fully, truthfully and successfully done, an evaluation
alone cannot remedy any situation and the ideal scene will not be attained.

The reason for and the final objective of any evaluation is the approach
toward or attainment of the IDEAL SCENE.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

133
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 25 NOVEMBER 1973-1
Remimeo Issue I Addition

Data Series 31 Addition

FINAL TARGET ATTACHMENT

To save the evaluator writing the final targets longhand this sheet is provided.
It can be filled in with the proper numbers and data, inapplicable lines crossed
out and this sheet stapled to the end of any eval.

(Fourth from last number of the evaluation program.) Verify from
personal inspection of the existing evidence or the scene itself
that every target has been fully done without omission, alteration,
falsehood or exaggerated reports. EVALUATOR

______ (Third from last number of the evaluation program.) Look at cur-
rent statistics and the results of the above inspection and the SITUA-
TION of this evaluation as written above AND SEE IF THE
SITUATION IS NO LONGER A THREAT. EVALUATOR

(Second from last number of the evaluation program.) Look
again at the IDEAL SCENE as written above. Then look at the
above two targets and further investigate and SEE IF THE IDEAL
SCENE HAS NOW BEEN APPROACHED MORE CLOSELY
OR ATTAINED. EVALUATOR

______ (Last numbered target of the evaluation program.) (A) If the
above three targets do not show a favorable approach toward or
attainment of the IDEAL SCENE, gather new data, investigate
further and REEVALUATE, or (B) If the IDEAL SCENE has
been more closely approached or attained, the following com-
mendations or awards are assigned:

EVALUATOR

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

134
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 DECEMBER 1973

Remimeo

Data Series 32

TARGET TROUBLES

TARGETS JUNIOR TO POLICY

A target given on an evaluation may not set aside management policy or
technical releases.

Where such a target is written or misused to supplant policy, a great deal of
trouble can follow.

Example: Org policy in authorized issues states that accounts for the week
must be finalized at 2:00 p.m. Thursday. Someone writes an evaluation and puts
a target in it to end the week on Sunday. People doing the target actions change
to Sunday. This is out of phase with all other actions and chaos results.

People tend to take orders from anyone and anything in a poorly organized
area.

When they use evaluation or project targets instead of policy, the whole
structure may begin to cave in.

NO EVAL TARGET IS SENIOR TO OFFICIAL ISSUES AND WHERE
THESE CONFLICT THE TARGET HAS THE JUNIOR POSITION.

The only way a target can change policy is to propose that such and such a
policy be officially reviewed on proper channels or that a new policy be written
and passed upon properly by those in actual authority.

Someone attempting to do a target who finds that it conflicts with policy or
official technical releases and yet goes on and does the target is of course actionable.

TARGETS OUT OF CONTEXT
CONTEXT: The interrelated conditions in which something exists or occurs.

OUT OF CONTEXT: Something written or done without relation to the prin-
cipal meaning of a work.

Targets must be written within the meaning of the whole evaluation.
Example: The evaluation is about pie. There is a target that says to polish
shoes just because the evaluator happened to think of it and squeezed it into the

program. A program written to increase pies winds up with the ideal scene of
polished shoes. No pies get increased so the evaluation fails.

135
Targets must be DONE within the context of the evaluation.

Example: An evaluation is done to increase central office collections. It calls
for another evaluation to be done on a statistic. The person doing that target
reduces the number of items collected upon and crashes central office collections.

The person DID NOT READ OR UNDERSTAND THE WHOLE EVALU-
ATION before he did the target and so did it in a way that accidentally defeats
the ideal scene.

Example: An evaluation is done to fill up a big hotel of 450 guest capacity.
One of its targets calls for project orders sending a team to the hotel. The person
who writes the project orders does not look at the evaluation or the hotel plans
and specifies 30 guests must be gotten! The evaluation is defeated.

FALSELY EVALUATING

A person who evaluates a situation without chasing up all the data or even
looking at the data in his files can bring about a false evaluation.

Example: A person has come back into an organization at a high level. The
place crashes. The evaluator does not examine personnel changes at the time of
the crash and comes up with “too many football games” as his Why and the
evaluation fails.

FALSE DONES

False reports that a target has been done when it has not been touched or has
been half-done at best is actionable in that he is defeating not only the evaluation
but the organization.

Example: The evaluator has an ideal scene of repaired machines that will
increase production. The mechanic reports all machines repaired now when he has
not even touched them. The evaluator sees production remains low, looks around
for a new Why. But his Why is falsely reported dones on his accurate eval!

PERSONAL CONTACT
Targets seldom get done without personal contact.

Evaluations should carry the name or post of the person who is overall re-
sponsible for the completion of the program.

Sitting at a desk while one is trying to get people to do targets has yet to
accomplish very much. One can have messengers or communicators or Flag Rep-
resentatives getting the targets done but these in turn must depend upon personal
contact.

A person assigned responsibility for getting a whole program done is not
likely to accomplish much without personal contact being made.

This can be done on a via. Mr. A in location A remote from Mr. C in
location C can get a target done reliably only if he has a Mr. B in that area

136
whose sole duty it is to personally contact Mr. C and have Mr. C get on with it
despite all reasons why not. That is how targets get done. That is also how they
can be reviewed.

Target troubles are many unless the program is under direct contact super-
vision. Even then targets get “bugged” (stalled). But the evaluator can find out
why if personal contact is made and the target can be pushed through.

SUCCESS

Therefore, the success of an evaluation in attaining an ideal scene depends in
no small measure on:

1.

Both evaluator and target executor realizing policy and technical materials
are senior to targets in programs and that targets do not set senior policy
aside. One of the best ways to prevent this is to know and refer to policy
and technical issues in targets.

Targets must be written in context with the evaluation and done in con-
text with the Ideal Scene. The best way to achieve this in writing an
eval’s targets is to make them consistent with the Why and Ideal Scene.
The best way to be sure that targets will be DONE in context is to re-
quire that anyone doing a target must first read the whole evaluation
(and be word cleared on it) before he does his target so that he does his
target in a way to improve the existing scene in the eval not some other
scene.

To prevent false evaluation, one may require that the evaluator attests
that all pertinent data and statistics have been examined and to disci-
pline such failures whenever an evaluation fails.

To prevent false dones, one must review the evidence of dones and sta-
tistics after the program is complete and discipline all falsely reporting
persons and reassign the targets or in any way possible get them actually
done.

The way to get a whole program done, target by target, is through per-
sonal contact. Supervise it by personal contact with those assigned the
targets. Or use a communicator or messenger. Where the people doing
the targets are remote from the evaluator, one must have someone there
to do the personal contact. And be sure THAT person isn’t just sitting at
a desk but is actually doing personal contact on targets. Thus all evalu-
ations, on the issue itself or by organizational pattern, should have some-
one who can personally contact people getting the targets done fully and
completely.

If these points about evaluations and their programs are understood, one can
and only then can move things toward the ideal scene.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

137
Remimeo

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 3 JULY 1974RB
REVISED 29 JANUARY 1979

Data Series 33RB

EVALUATION, CRITICISM OF

There are six duties of a person who is responsible for passing evaluations:

l.

4.
5.
6.

To see that the evaluation is correct and that it can accomplish or ap-
proach the ideal scene;

That those doing evaluations, by the process of the criticism itself, become
trained and better evaluators;

That persons doing evaluations become correctly and well trained by the
process of training, cramming and, as needed, ethics;

To see that evaluations do occur on existing situations;
To see that unevaluated situations do not exist and;

To make sure that the Data Series is used to its full potential.

When an evaluation is rejected, care must be taken that the criticism is cor-
rect and not capricious.

If one gives out-tech criticisms of evaluations, no evaluator will really ever
learn evaluation. He will just become confused and desperate. The quality of
evaluations will deteriorate and the Data Series potential will be defeated.

Therefore the only criteria that may be used in calling attention to outnesses
in an eval, a requested rewrite or correction are:

A.
B.
C.

co am oO

Purity of form (all parts of an eval included).
Verification of stats.

Date coincidence correct and proven on graphs, using all graphs that
have to do with the situation.

GDS analysis supporting the eval (stat management PLs apply).
Exactly offered data not borne out by an inspection of files.
No Situation.

Insufficiently broad Situation.

Inconsistent— Policy — Situation— Stats— Data— Why—lIdeal Scene—
Handling—targets, not on same subject. The inconsistency must be
precisely pointed out.

138
I. Outpoints in the eval itself—such as in Bright Idea or Handling, etc.
The outpoint must be precisely noted and named. This does not include
outpoints in the data section which are the outpoints on which the eval is
based.

J. Not all pertinent or available data applicable or needed was examined by
the evaluator. The excluded data must be exactly stated as to what it is
and where found. Not looking at all applicable or important data makes
it a partial eval.

Wrong Why.
L. Weak Handling.

M. Handling does not include targets to handle directly or indirectly the
more serious outnesses found in the data mentioned.

N. Absence of ethics handling on serious ethics matters found in the data
mentioned or of the Ethics Why.

O. No method of implementing the evaluation or maintaining the scene and
getting its targets done. Such as a broken line between evaluator and scene
or omitted terminals or ethics Who(s) depended upon to do the targets.

P. Sequence of handling incorrect or omitted. A production target must
come first. Errors of solid organize for many early consecutive targets
without production in them, no organizing at all are flunks.

Q. Vague generalities in postings which do not name the new person or the
person to replace the person being moved up.

R. Musical chairs.

"”

No resources or ways to get them or nonutilization of known resources
or excessive use of resources for no real gain.

Off-policy orders or orders that set policy.

No target or targets to get in the policies mentioned under ‘‘Policy.”’
Unreadable or illegible presentation of the eval for criticism or review.
Failure to return eval promptly with corrections.

Bright Idea isn’t bright enough.

No eval.

Nx x 2 < cn

No data trail, incorrect data trail.

If the reviewer, corrector or critic of evaluations does the above AND
NOTHING ELSE he will be rewarded with better and better evaluations, less and
less time spent correcting, more and more gain by use of the Data Series and a
happier and more productive scene entirely.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

139
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 18 JULY 1974

Remimeo

Data Series 34

SITUATION CORRECTION

I have just reviewed a number of attempted evaluations and was struck by the
similarity of errors in them. None of these evaluations would have reached any
ideal scene or even improved the existing scene.

The real reason for this is that the majority of them had a highly generalized
Situation such as “Bidawee Biscuit Company failing” or “Stats down from last
year.” They then proceeded on a data trail and got a “Why.”

In these cases the Why they found was actually the situation!

Each of them had failed to use the data trail to find the situation. They were
using the data trail to find a Why!

The evals then had no Why.

The handling was just a bunch of orders that were in fact unevaluated orders
since no real Why had been found.

Like in playing a game these evaluators had started 50 feet back of the start-
ing line and when they got to the starting line (the situation) they assumed it was
the finish.

If you look at an “evaluation” that has a generalized “situation” like “‘con-
tinental products getting fewer,” you will find in a lot of cases (not always accu-
rately) that what was put down as the “Why” was in fact the situation. This left
the “eval” without a Why. Thus the ideal scene would be wrong and the handling
ineffective.

Example: (not in form) “Situation: Gus Restaurant failing.” ‘Data: Customers
refusing food, etc., etc.” “Why: The food isn’t good.” “Ideal scene: A successful
Gus Restaurant.” “Handling: Force Gus to serve better food, etc., etc.” That
isn’t an eval. That is an observation that if Gus Restaurant is to survive it better
get evaluated. It is being evaled because it isn’t surviving. Now look at this: The
data trail led to “the food isn’t good.” That’s a situation. Why isn’t it good
enough? Well it turns out the cook got 15 percent commission from the store for
buying bad food at high prices. And Gus didn’t know this. So bang, we handle.
Gus Restaurant achieves ideal scene of “Gus Restaurant serving magnificent
chow.”

In this example if you used the situation for a Why the Who would probably
be Gus!

140
The data trail of outpoints from a highly general “situation” (that is only an
observation like failing stats) will lead one to the situation and then a closer look
(also by outpoints) will lead one to the real Why and permit fast handling.

DATA TRAIL

People can get too fixated on the history of something. They can call this a
“data trail.” Well, all right, if it’s a trail of outpoints.

But significances of history have little to do with evaluation.
Let us say you see the machine division is failing.

Now, if you simply take masses of data about it and just start turning over 10
or 12 sheets at a time looking for outpoints only and keep a tally of what they
are and to whom they belong, you will wind up with your situation area and
probably your situation without reading any significances at all.

Now that you have your area and situation in it, you can start really reading
all about it and get that existing scene’s data and its outpoints. And your Why
leaps at you.

SUBSTITUTION
You can’t substitute stats for a situation or a situation for a Why.
But substitution of one part of an eval for another is a common fault.

Substituting a general hope for the ideal scene you really would and could
achieve makes a sort of failed feeling in an eval. “Gus Restaurant being best in
town” is nice but “Lots of customers very well fed so Gus Restaurant survives”
is what you are trying to achieve. That can occur and will be reached if you find
the real Why.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

141
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 JULY 1974

Remimea

Data Series 35

EVAL CORRECTION

An evaluation submitted for an okay is only reviewed to the first major out-
ness (see HCO PL 3 July 74, Data Series 33) and is then returned for correction.

Only when no major correction is necessary does one then verify all data or
go to an extensive review of th. whole eval.

This makes the line very fast. It also saves a great deal of work by one and all.

If the Stats are incorrectly given, that’s it. Reject. If the Why is really the
Situation, that’s it.

On the reject one gives the letter of Data Series 33 that is not correct and
any reference to the Data Series that would seem helpful.

An evaluation corrector will see how well this rejection system works when
you find that the eval, let us say, has no Situation on it, but only some Stats. Why
verify anything as a whole new body of data may have to be found.

In correcting evals, if a Situation is given, I usually call for the main Stats of
the unit being evaluated to see if these show any reason to handle it at all. I
recently found an activity had had its chief removed when his Stats were in
Power. The activity then crashed. And that was the Situation. It was made by an
evaluator and an eval corrector not looking at the Stats!

If no error exists in Situation or Stats, I read the eval down to Bright Idea
and look especially at the Why, Ideal Scene and Handling to see if one would
make the others.

If that’s okay, I look at the targets of Handling and the Resources.

If those are okay, I look at Data and Outpoints. If these are all okay, J then
verify the Data.

But if at any of these steps I find an error, I then reject at once for immediate
correction.

Often, by using only basic things to reject, the whole eval has to be redone
as the basics are so far wrong.

142
If you try to correct the whole thing before rejecting or if you correct tiny
little things instead of the big ones, the whole line slows.

Eval correction should be a fast, helpful line, strictly on-policy, no opinion.

That way the job of correction becomes easier and easier.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

143
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 11 AUGUST 1974

Remimeo

Data Series 36

ENVISIONING THE IDEAL SCENE

If one cannot envision the Ideal Scene, one is not likely to be able to see a
situation or get one.

A SITUATION IS THE MOST MAJOR DEPARTURE FROM THE IDEAL
SCENE.

Thus:

ONE MUST BE ABLE TO ENVISION AN IDEAL SCENE TO FIND A
SITUATION.

A lot of “ideal scenes” you see are just glib. An afterthought.

Some people know the proper scene so well they at once recognize that a
departure from it has occurred, which is fine. But such people do not realize,
when they are teaching evaluation or correcting evals, that others may not know
the proper scene well enough to get an idea of what the Ideal Scene should be.
Thus, a wrong target occurs. The teacher or corrector keeps putting attention on
the incorrectness of the situation given in the eval instead of noticing that the
Ideal Scene is adrift.

An Ideal Scene is FUTURE.

When one is stuck on the time track, it may seem pretty difficult to envision
a future.

In politics this is called “reactionary” or “‘conservative.” These mean any
resistance to change even when it is an improvement. The bad old days seem to
be the good old days to such people. Yet the old days will not come again. One
has to make the new days good.

“Liberals,” “socialists” and such make great propaganda out of this. They
inveigh against (criticize) conservatives and say the future must be reckoned with.
And they hold up some often incredible future scene and say the way to it is by
“revolution” or destroying everything that was.

Both viewpoints could be severely criticized. The conservative tries to stick
on the time track with no reality on the fact that today will be yesterday in 24
hours. The superliberal skips tomorrow entirely and goes up the track 5 or 10
years to a perfect state which can never exist or is falsely represented as possible.

In between these two viewpoints we have the attainable.

144
And we come to an Ideal Scene that is possible and will occur if the Why is
right and handling is correct and done.

Envisioning an attainable future requires some connection with reality.

There is no harm at all in dreaming wonderful dreams for the future. It’s
almost the bread of life.

But how about giving oneself a crashing failure by disconnecting from any
reality?

Some laborers do this to themselves. Taking no steps to attain it, they day-
dream themselves as kings or some other grand identity. Well, all right. But that
isn’t an “Ideal Scene.” That’s a delusion engaged upon for self-gratification in a
dream world.

One cannot only dream a possible Ideal Scene but he can attain it.
So an Ideal Scene is SOMETHING THAT CAN BE ATTAINED.
It should be quite real.

Some people setting unreal quotas are really setting some impossible Ideal
Scene. “Complete this work in | hour!” to someone working hard on a job that
will take 4 days is delusory. It is setting, without saying so, the Ideal Scene of
having a worker who is really a magician! Well, maybe if he were audited and
hatted he would be. But that’s sure some Ideal Scene! The here and now is a guy
sweating it out and trying. And that’s an Ideal Scene that is missed!

And so are many Ideal Scenes missed. The offices neat and orderly might
not even be imagined by someone who has seen them in a mess for two years. He
may think that’s the way they’re supposed to be! And be quite incapable of en-
visioning the offices in any other condition!

Thus, if one cannot see the offices should be clean, he does not see that they
are dirty and messy as a situation. Thus when he is told the public won’t come
into the place, and even if he finds the place is full of old dirty junk, he can’t
evaluate it as a clean orderly place would not be envisioned by him. So he
doesn’t get “dirty place” as a valuable datum, doesn’t get “a clean orderly place
that is inviting to the public” as an Ideal Scene, doesn’t get “office so dirty the
public won’t go near it” as a situation and so cannot find a Why to lack of
public! And so as he didn’t find Why it was so dirty and disorderly, it wouldn’t
handle. So there would be a failed eval.

Yet the teacher or evaluation corrector would not realize the person could not
envision an Ideal Scene and so keep telling the person to find the situation
whereas the Ideal Scene was what was out.

You can get some very beautiful Ideal Scenes AND attain them—if you can
evaluate!

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

145
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 12 AUGUST 1974

Remimeo
Data Series 37

WHYS OPEN THE DOOR

You can really understand a real Why if you realize this:
A REAL WHY OPENS THE DOOR TO HANDLING.

If you write down a Why, ask this question of it: ““Does this open the door to
handling?”

If it does not, then it is a wrong Why.

Backtracking to find how it is wrong, one examines the Ideal Scene and the
situation one already has.

The outpoints should be checked. The completeness of data should be
checked. One may find he is in a wrong area of the scene.

Correct that, correct the Ideal Scene, correct the situation and look for more
data.

With the outpoints of more data one can achieve the real Why that wil] open
the door to handling.

Quite often an “evaluator” “knows” the Why before he begins. This is fatal.
Why evaluate?

Some of the most workable Whys I’ve ever found surprised me! So usually
I also ask, did I know this? Am I surprised? The chances are, if I “knew”
it already (and the situation still exists) it is a wrong Why. And needs proper
evaluation.

When you have a right Why, handling becomes simple. The more one has to
beat his brains for a bright idea to handle, the more likely it is that he has a
wrong Why.

So if you’re not a bit surprised and if the handling doesn’t leap out at you
then THE WHY HAS NOT OPENED THE DOOR and is probably wrong.

I have seen evaluators take weeks to do an evaluation. In such cases they
went on and on reading as they did not know how to find a real Why. Actually
they did not know what one was.

By going through the total current files of an activity looking for outpoints
just by randomly glancing at data sheets from all sources, you can find the
AREA. Outpoints lead you straight to it.

An Ideal Scene for that smaller AREA is fairly easy to envision.

146
The type of outpoint will generally give you how the departure is. One can
then get the Situation.

By looking over (in detail now) the data of that smaller area and counting the
outpoints, one can find the Why.

The Why will be how come the situation is such a departure from the Ideal
Scene and WILL OPEN THE DOOR TO HANDLING.

If it doesn’t, then review the whole thing, do the steps again. Don’t just sit
and sag!

Let’s say we find outpoints of added inapplicable data in all reports. And
they lead to Reception. The Ideal Scene of Reception is easy: attractive pleasant
atmosphere, welcoming in the public.

We find more detailed reports that the place is full of junk and filthy and we
get our situation, “public repelled by filthy messy Reception.”

Now why?

So back to the real data and we find the janitor never cleans it. Or anything
else. The easy out is just sack the janitor (and leave the post empty). But that
won’t handle so we have no Why.

So we dig and dig and suddenly we find that the staff refer to the janitor in
lowly and disrespectful terms: “Janitor has no status.” Well, the outpoints all say
so. And it opens the door to a handling.

So we handle by transferring the janitor org board position from Treasury
where it went as he “looks after assets” to the Office of the President with the
President’s Secretary as his direct senior.

We write up a program for clean offices.
Magic!

The offices get clean!

The public again comes in.

The Ideal Scene is attained.

(You may think this example is pretty unreal. But actually it once happened
and worked!)

So a right Why opens the door to handling.

If it doesn’t, look harder.

THERE IS ALWAYS A REASON FOR THINGS.

And if your Ideal Scene and Situation are correct, you can find the real Why

that opens the door.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

147
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 3 OCTOBER 1974

Remimeo

Data Series 38

PLUSPOINT LIST

The following is a list of PLUSPOINTS which are used in evaluation.

Needless to say, pluspoints are very important in evaluation as they show
where LOGIC exists and where things are going right or likely to.

RELATED FACTS KNOWN. (All relevant facts known.)
EVENTS IN CORRECT SEQUENCE. (Events in actual sequence.)
TIME NOTED. (Time is properly noted.)

DATA PROVEN FACTUAL. (Data must be factual, which is to say, true and
valid.)

CORRECT RELATIVE IMPORTANCE. (The important and unimportant are
correctly sorted out.)

EXPECTED TIME PERIOD. (Events occurring or done in the time one
would reasonably expect them to be.)

ADEQUATE DATA. (No sectors of omitted data that would influence the
situation. )

APPLICABLE DATA. (The data presented or available applies to the matter
in hand and not something else.)

CORRECT SOURCE. (Not wrong source.)

CORRECT TARGET. (Not going in some direction that would be wrong for
the situation.)

DATA IN SAME CLASSIFICATION. (Data from two or more different
classes of material not introduced as the same class.)

IDENTITIES ARE IDENTICAL. (Not similar or different.)
SIMILARITIES ARE SIMILAR. (Not identical or different.)

DIFFERENCES ARE DIFFERENT. (Not made to be identical or similar.)

148
The use of the word “pluspoint” in an evaluation without saying what type
of pluspoint it is, is a deficiency in recognizing the different pluspoints as above.
It would be like saying each outpoint is simply an outpoint without saying what
outpoint it was.

In doing evaluations to find why things got better so they can be repeated, it
is vital to use the actual pluspoints by name as above. They can then be counted
and handled as in the case of outpoints.

Pluspoints are, after all, what make things go right.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

149
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 28 OCTOBER 1974

Remimeo

Data Series 39

WHO-WHERE FINDING

You may now and then see an eval that winds up with a Who. Very rarely
you also find one that winds up in a Where. Sometimes you find an “evaluator”
who only finds Whos or Wheres.

If this puzzles you when you see such “evals” or if you land in that situation
yourself while evaluating, remember this:

AN “EVAL” THAT ONLY HAS A WHO OR A WHERE AS ITS WHY IS
INCOMPLETE.

What has happened is this: The ‘‘evaluator” does an outpoint count only for
Who or Where. He does not then really investigate or dig up the real data on that
Who or Where but lets it go at that. He says—WHY: Dept 1 not functioning.
WHO: Director of Personnel. IDEAL SCENE: A functioning Dept 1. HAN-
DLING: Shoot the Dir Personnel.

Such evals do NOT raise statistics. They do not work. Because they are not
complete!

In any eval you have to do an outpoint count to find where or who to inves-
tigate. This prior outpoint count does not appear, always, on the eval form. It’s
just where to look.

Having gotten the Who or Where, you NOW do a full readout, lift the rocks,
pry into the cracks and find the Why.

It can even get worse. Having seen something wrong, one puts down a situ-
ation. He does a preliminary outpoint count for a Where or Who and then dis-
covers a more basic or even worse situation. In other words, his situation can
change!

Example: No personnel being hired leads one to Dept 1, Personnel. So one
writes the situation: ““No one being hired.” Then one can easily dash off, “Why:
Dept | inactive. Ideal Scene: An active Dept | hiring personnel.” And write up a
handling: “Hire people.”

Great, easy as pie. But somehow six months later there are stil/ no personnel!
The reason is simple: The “evaluator” never went beyond the Who-Where. He
put down a Who-Where as his Why.

Real evaluation would go this way: First observed situation, “no personnel

being hired.” The Who-Where comes up as Dept 1. Now and only now do we
have something to evaluate. So our situation has changed. It becomes, “Dept 1

150
inactive.” And we investigate, and lo and behold there is no one in that whole
division! Again we could go off too early. It is tempting to say, “Why: No one in
it!’ And say, ‘Handling: Put somebody in it!”

But actually “no one in it” is just data! Certainly the execs who should be
screaming for personnel know there is no one in Dept |. After all. they get
cobwebs on their faces every time they pass the door! So it is just an outpoint,
not a Why as it does not securely lead to solution. So we look further. We find
seven previous orders to put on a Director of Personnel! The writers of these
orders are not the Whos but who they were given to are elected. That’s seven
noncompliances by the executive in charge of organizing! And this turns out to
be Joe Schmoe. Now we have a Who. So what’s with this Joe Schmoe? So we go
to anything connected with Schmoe and we locate board of directors minutes
of meetings and herein he has been stating for two years repeatedly that “The
organization only makes so much money anyway so if we hire anybody to deliver
service we might go broke.” As the organization has been going broke for those
two years and the last Dir Personnel was fired two years ago, we now also have
our DATE COINCIDENCE. But this is still just an outpoint—contrary facts, as
one has to deliver to stay solvent. So we look up Joe Schmoe even further and we
find he is also the chief stockholder in a rival company! So here is our Why:
“Organization being suppressed by the chief stockholder in the company’s rival.”
“Who: Joe Schmoe. Ideal Scene: Organization hiring personnel needed to deliver.”
Now for the handling. Well, Joe Schmoe could mess things up further if we just
fired him. So we better know what we’re doing. We have found our organization
controls the tin Joe Schmoe’s company needs for its cans. So we shut off the tin
supply and when Schmoe’s stock falls we buy it up, merge the companies and
fire Joe. Or so a businessman would do. THAT handles it!

Shallow evals that stop with a Who-Where on the first inspection don't suc-
ceed. Outpoints are usually aberrated and the people there around them usually
handle things unless they have depth of mystery.

You have to have a Who-Where to begin your investigation. Once you find
your Who or your area, now the outpoints begin to count.

Very few situations in actual fact are caused by active Whos. Usually it is
inactive Whos, confronted with situations they have not grasped and don’t see
any way through. A classic case was a situation that did not resolve for over a
year until very close investigation discovered a statistic was wrongly worked out
and which targeted an area in the wrong direction. One could have shot ““Whos”
by the dozen without ever solving it!

So when you see a Who-Where as a Why, you know one thing: The eval is
incomplete.

You can cure someone doing this chronically by making him first list the
outpoints that show Who-Where to look. And then make him go on with the
evaluation outpoints that lead to a Why, giving two counts of outpoints. The light
will dawn.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

151
Remimeo
Evaluators
DSEC Students
Execs

Flag Bureaux
FOLOs

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 12 MARCH 1975
Issue II

Data Series 40

THE IDEAL ORG

(First appeared as LRH ED 102 Int,
20 May 70, referring to evaluation)

The ideal org would be an activity where people came to achieve freedom
and where they had confidence they would attain it.

It would have enough space in which to train, process and administrate with-

out crowding.

It would be located where the public could identify and find it.

It would be busy looking, with staff in motion, not standing about.

It would be clean and attractive enough not to repel its public.

Its files and papers, baskets and lines would be in good order.

The org board would be up-to-date and where the public could see who and
what was where and which the staff would use for routing and action.

A heavy outflow of letters and mailings would be pouring out.

Answers would be pouring in.

Auditors would be auditing in Div 4 HGC and Qual would be rather empty.

Supervisors would be training students interestedly and 2-way comming all

slows.

The HCO Area Sec would have hats for everyone. And checked out on

everyone.

There would be a pool of people in training to take over new admin and tech

posts.

The staff would be well paid because they were productive.

The Public Divisions would be buzzing with effective action and new people
and furnishing a torrent of new names to CF.

The pcs would be getting full Grades to ability attained for each, not eight

152
minutes from 0 to IV. but more like thirty processes. And they would be leaving
with high praises.

The students would be graduating all on fire to audit.

One could look at this ideal org and know that rhis was the place a new
civilization was being established for this planet.

The thousand or more actions that made it up would dovetail smoothly one
with another.

And the PR area control would be such that no one would dream of threat-
ening it.

Such an ideal org would be built by taking what one has and step by step
building and smoothing: grooving in and handling each of its functions, with
each of its divisions doing more and more of its full job better and better.

The business is always there—the skill with which it is handled and the re-
sults on pcs and students is the single important line which makes it possible to
build the rest.

The ideal org is the image one builds toward. It is the product of the caus-
ative actions of many. Anything which is short of an ideal org is an outpoint that
can be put right. The end product is not just an ideal org but a new civilization
already on its way.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

153
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 15 MARCH 1977RA
Remimeo REVISED 5 NOVEMBER 1990

Data Series 41RA

EVALUATION: THE SITUATION

(Extracted from an LRH talk
to Staff Aides on 2 Jan. 72)

There are bad situations, good situations and no situations. A situation is
something that applies to survival and if you evaluate the word “situation”
against survival, you’ve got it. A good situation is a high level of survival; a bad
situation is a threatened survival and a no situation is something that won’t affect
survival.

We’ve gone ahead of the whole show of intelligence with the Data Series.

NOTE: We are using intelligence as an example solely and only because it is
the most inclusive system man has developed for collection and evaluation of data.

We have greatly extended and refined this system. Espionage and other in-
telligence activities and skills have no part in our application. We are using intelli-
gence as an example of data usage systems, that is all.

You are out into an area of greater simplification and far more use. This
doesn’t necessarily make anyone an intelligence officer, but a general or a head
of something or a general manager or an executive who does not know how to
evaluate a situation will make nothing but mistakes. The mistakes of history are
made by people who cannot evaluate, by which we mean “determine the
situation” — which even more simplified would be “find out the situation.”” From
this given body of data, from that indicator we can find a good situation, or a bad
situation or a no situation. And this is what one is trying to determine. The more
skilled one becomes in doing this, the less work it is. It is a matter of skill.

To give you an idea: If you tried to play every note of a concerto separately
by having to look up each note in the chord book and then strike it on the piano,
you wouldn’t have much of a tune, right? But the longer you did that, the more
likely you were to begin to approximate some sort of something that sounds like
music. But it would take a lot of practice.

Now, you can get so all-fired-good at evaluation that you can take an isolated
indicator and know immediately where it fits into because you know it fits into
the plan of things and because you know it is or isn’t part of an ideal scene. It’s
better than the existing scene or it is too far from an ideal scene. You can pick up
an indicator in this way—and it sometimes probably looks magical to you how I
will suddenly pick up an isolated instance and look down the line and we find a
roaring hot situation at the other end of it.

154
Now, that is done out of an economy of data. It is done because one has not
the time to investigate or read all of the data which might exist on this particular
subject being investigated. So one learns to do something that looks absolutely
intuitive, and when you're terrifically hot at this it is called “flair.”

Prediction from data is an essential part of evaluation. “This datum is an
outpoint—it shouldn’t be, peculiar.” Now it will predict more data.

You have to be so hot that you will notice something is an outpoint—it’s a
wild outpoint of some kind or another—except its magnitude, size of datum. How
important is this datum? The evaluation of importance is one of the more difficult
things people do. They have a tendency to consider things a monotone impor-
tance. You have to train yourself out of that.

What do we get here then as a qualification for an evaluator? You have to
know all the outpoints in sight. You have to know what outpoints are. But that’s
rather thinking backwards because you should know that something shouldn’t be.
And as soon as you get a “shouldn’t be” you can do a prediction. And that leads
you into an investigation—by viewing other data. In other words you find this
terrific outpoint or these outpoints and you find out where they exist, it leads you
into, very directly, the point that you should be investigating.

DEFINITION OF EVALUATION

This is as close as the dictionary comes to the definition of evaluation: “‘to
examine and judge concerning the worth, quality, significance, amount, degree
or condition of.” (The Webster’s Third International Dictionary) Now to edit that
down, it’s “to examine and judge the significance and condition of.”

An evaluation: “the act or result of evaluating; judgment, appraisal, rating,
interpretation.” And an evaluator is ‘‘one that evaluates. An intelligence officer
is supposed to be a professional evaluator.” (The Webster's Third International
Dictionary)

This word is a technical word which isn’t given in these dictionaries. It is an
action which is basically an intelligence action.

The actual meaning which is supposed to be embraced in the word is: “to
examine the evidence in order to determine the situation,” and that is the intelli-
gence meaning, and then it could have a further: “‘so as to formulate policy or
planning relating thereto.” In other words, “What is the enemy going to do?” So
the general can say, “Therefore we should. . .”

WHAT IS EVALUATION

Here is an example of what evaluation is, the type of thing expected of an
evaluator.

I was looking at an org’s graphs and all of a sudden I see a drift down of
reserves and a level of bills. The bills are level, level, level—drift down of re-
serves, until all of a sudden it’s about to cross and this was an org where we just
changed the CO. So I say, ‘“‘Hey whoa! Wait a minute, wait a minute! This or-
ganization is spending more than its income obviously by the looks of this graph.
So let’s look into this just a bit further.” I looked further and got more data and

155
I found out that the org was running insolvent. The Data Bureau already had a
report on this; I picked it up on another line. I just picked it up off graphs.

Further investigation found out that the new CO had taken over from the old
CO and had inherited an extremely backlogged org—included backlogged bills.
And the new CO had been sent in there on a set of Garrison Mission Orders—
and they just contained standard COing actions when they should have been MOs
designed to handle the insolvency scene—forcing the org to promote and make
income; then making an announcement that no POs will be signed except pro-
motion, wages and utilities; then get in the dateline paying and forcing Accounts
to dig it up out of all their mouseholes and all those bills that have been in there
for a year or two and the stuff they didn’t file and get a dateline paying system
in. Then you start surveying like mad to find out what the organization can
sell and then you start delivering, beef up your delivery lines and so on.

It wasn’t any surprise to me to learn that that graph was a false report, of
course. But this is no explanation. It doesn’t mean the situation doesn’t exist—
the situation does exist—but the graph is a false report. That is a hellish outpoint
all in itself. It’s actually backed up by other data but you could have taken it this
way: You could have seen the graph declining—that is reserves going down, bills
staying the same and you find out it’s a false report. At that moment, by Data
Series, you charge in and investigate the heck out of it. Here’s an indicator, then
another indicator that’s a false report.

Where did I count outpoints? I was counting them all the time. One is
enough—a declining reserves graph and a holding debts graph—well, that was
enough. So the counting was “one,” and as I looked a little further I got “two”
and then as I looked a little further I got a “three” and a “four” and a “five”
and a “six.” We did a handling and more outpoints showed up. Right as you are
handling the thing more and more outpoints will show up so there is a point
where you neglect any more outpoints, you can go on as a lifetime profession
finding outpoints in one of these areas. It’s enough.

We have actually done something with the Data Series which has never be-
fore been done. Other data evaluation systems have to do with the reliability of
the observer, which determines if the reported fact is a “proper datum.” But all of
their work is done on computers and those computers are built against logic sys-
tems developed by the Greeks. But it is data, validity of, which monitors logic.

A black propaganda operation is almost totally concerned with feeding
wrong data into the population and therefore the population cannot come to cor-
rect conclusions and their actions will be peculiar. There are experts in black
propaganda and they’re fully trained in it and they do it all the time.

Back of wrong data you will normally find an impure intent. So that some-
body is giving you false reports is an evaluation in itself.

An evaluation first requires data. The absence of data you should have would
give you an evaluation. We knew something was wrong with an area because
all of a sudden somebody found out they weren’t sending in their reports. The
absence of data is an adequate evaluation that there is something wrong. And in
one such case it actually took weeks to find out what was wrong.

156
If you find the outpoint, you’re into evaluating a situation. You're just looking
at data—you find an outpoint, you investigate that. You find more outpoints, you
go along and say, “It’s the thing that we’re looking at now, what the heck... ,”
because you’re obviously traveling away from the ideal scene or you’ve found
something that went much closer to the ideal scene or something that didn’t
change it. You then look it over and say, “It’s this point,” and at that moment
you can figure out why this is occurring. ‘““Now why is this occurring?” And that
requires quite a bit of data. ‘““Why is this occurring?” Therefore when you can
say ““Why,” now you can handle.

What you want is the outpoint and an outpoint is a departure from the ideal
scene. That tells you that there is an area to investigate and you can investigate it
simply by going and finding more data and more outpoints and then as your data
accumulates you can get why it’s a departure. The accuracy of your Why then
gives you the point which you will have to handle which is all very neat and
there comes in your recommendation.

This is the trick on evaluation: You have to learn what is an outpoint, what is
this outrageous thing, and then that, that cones you down. Now you could find all
kinds of little points.

REVIEW

Having handled the thing or having done something about it, don’t be too
surprised to now and then find a lot more data suddenly emerge. In fact it is
almost usual now that you’ve started to handle something for more data to
emerge. But you have to look it over. You have to say, “Well, have we handled it?
Does this data confirm our Why or doesn’t it confirm our Why?” And that’s all
you do with that data—it’s confirmatory.

Sometimes you get data after the fact, after you’ve taken action. That is a
review of your evaluation. When the data comes in after the fact, there’s another
step involved here.

You review the situation and all of a sudden you find out you were looking at
a heck of a wrong Why. One of the first things that will tell you you operated on
a wrong Why is that the stats went down—because it departed further from the
ideal scene.

You get injustices and that sort of thing coming out of wrong evaluations, so
this is one of the reasons why you watch an evaluation in your line of country—
you watch an evaluation after the fact. Was it true? So there’s a confirmatory
step which isn’t mentioned in the Data Series—‘‘ Was that the right Why?” The
Data Series does mention it’s whether or not the stat goes up. But it’s worse than
that: ‘“‘Did you have the right Why?” or “Did you shoot down the wrong man?”

Now any time you find thirty people on staff being removed because they
were suppressive, you know they had the wrong Why, because the percentages
are wrong. It’s just as mathematical as that. If they’ve done that then I can also
assure you they’ve left the suppressive on the staff and I can also assure you the
guy that did it was suppressive.

157
FAMILIARITY

We have a considerable amount of technology which is administrative tech-
nology, which gives us an ideal scene, and with which we must be familiar in
order to evaluate and handle. We would have to be as practiced in this as in the
building of armament factories or running navies or building toy balloons or try-
ing to get housing furnished to the great unhoused if that’s what we were doing—
you have to have some familiarity with the type of scene which you’re handling.

If you’re good at this you don’t go on wasting your time and energy. You
find the right Why, you set it up, you make sure that it does get set up—that
there’s nothing more you have to do with it and then that’s that. Sometimes that
takes quite a while but note that if you’re immediately pressing down this Why
all the rest of the way and you go on past the point where you corrected it—the
thing is corrected—now you're handling a no situation.

If you didn’t have evaluation you would find yourself handling no situations
and neglecting tough situations and not taking advantage of good situations. And
that is how you get a bureaucracy and that is how you get areas all overmanned.

CLOUDING UP A SITUATION

Occasionally you'll find a scene wherein a person’s or area’s PR is greater to
him than production—PR, personal PR, means more than production. And that
is a characteristic of a suppressive. He’ll fog the situation up with big PR about
how good it is so it can’t be handled. So there’s somebody sitting on those lines
who is a bit suppressive.

THE WHY

You have to know when you don’t have a Why. It is very, very important to
know you don’t have a Why.

The end product of your evaluation could be said to be ‘“‘What do we do
about this?” In other words, your recommendation could be said to be the end
product. Actually that’s a short circuit. As far as your investigation and your data
analysis is concerned your first target, the Why, if skipped will defeat the end
product of your evaluation. If that Why is valid then you can handle.

A Why is just this: It is the reason there has been a departure or closer
approach to or an exceeding of the ideal scene.

What will defeat you continuously is trying to find Whys in no situations.
You won’t find a Why. If you can’t find a Why readily then you can possibly
suspect that you have a no situation.

A Why, by essence, is something you can do something about. You have to
have a recommended action on top of the Why.

The Why is something which departed from, the reason it departed from or
the reason why it bettered the ideal scene or got closer to it. It is a Why you can
use and which will bring you a better scene.

Therefore the definition of a Why is: It must be something which will permit

158
you to bring about a better scene—not necessarily bring about the ideal scene.
You might actually have a better scene than the ideal scene!

We’ve described the ideal scene as so-and-so and all of a sudden a Why
suddenly emerges which actually makes the ideal scene look pale. Taking the
ideal scene of a moderately affluent org—we might all of a sudden move into a
situation where the ideal scene was quite something else and we find out “How
come all of a sudden Keokuk has made 8 million dollars in the last 13 days?”
How come? We don’t have an ideal scene anymore.

IMPORTANCE OF HAVING A WHY

We have a system of data handling which is superior to that of the intelli-
gence organizations of today. I can say that because I know their systems and
they don’t hold good. Imagine somebody saying, “Well, we shouldn’t pay any
attention to Agent 622’s reports from Kobongo because they’re false.” Oh?
That’d mean one had a turned agent or an agent that wasn’t working. In other
words, it isn’t meaningless, it’s not something you discard into the wastebasket.
Now a good intelligence officer doesn’t always discard this. He says, “Well, it’s
false data so therefore he’s probably been taken over by the enemy.’ And he does
make some sort of hit at it.

But there are other outpoints that they would never have noticed. “A datum
is okay ... .” this is the general think—not just of the generals but this is gen-
eral intelligence think. ““Of the data we receive, a great deal of it is not useful
because it doesn’t come from reliable observers.” Well that’s a hell of an out-
point in itself. If an enemy battleship was seen on the coast it wouldn’t matter
who saw it—intelligence organizations would not pick it up unless it had been
observed by a trained officer. “The town could not have been shelled because no
reliable observer put a report in—there was no artilleryman to tell us whether or
not...”

So our system doesn’t begin with, “The Slobovians are building 85,000 pan-
zer tanks, and that’s by a reliable observer because Agent 462 has given us fac-
tual reports in the past and it’s confirmed by aerial observation and satellite
pictures . . .” So what! The intelligence would be, “Why are the Slobovians
building this many panzer tanks? Now, is this a lot more panzer tanks than
Slobovians normally build?” Because maybe Slobovians go in for a lot of build-
ing panzer tanks so they can call them T-something-or-other and say they were
invented in Slobograv. Why? And we right away have a new brand of
intelligence— Why? Why are they building these panzer tanks? One is the fact
that they’re building these panzer tanks, is that an outpoint? Well, is it a lot more
panzer tanks than they have built before? Is it a lot less? Did they build a million
a year and are only building 200,000 a year now?

Now the officer evaluating this hasn’t any Why, he hasn’t anything so he
makes the supposition that the Slobovians are now easing off. “Yeah, well Gen-
eral, the Slobovians are now easing off.” “Yes, Mr. President, the Slobovians are
now easing off and everything is going to be fine.” The fool! What’s the Why?
Where’s the Why? He assumed something—he didn’t investigate further. He
didn’t look all over the place and find a whole lot of political ramifications and
add it all up and so forth. Now, had he known about it he would have looked
from that data to more outpoints and he would have found something or other—

159
building the tanks for Bongoland so that they could knock out their neighboring
country. Why? Why? Because they have a contract with Bongoland to furnish
them with tanks. He could’ve found something like that.

You get these unwarranted conclusions because they don’t have the mecha-
nism of asking ““Why?” and they don’t investigate until they have an adequate
Why that explains it. When you’ve got a Why you can handle.

THE CHANGE

One more tip on this whole scene. If you can’t find the Why, you revert. |
learned this about life out of plant research. I found out that you went back to the
point of major change in a greenhouse or a garden and corrected it the second
you saw the plants dying. You required, then, a logging of everything that was done.
If you had a log of everything that was done you could get the date and the
change. You knew the date they started to wilt so what change was around the
vicinity of that date? And you inevitably and invariably found a huge change had
taken place. not a small one. And the tip is that if all else fails, why just go back
to your major change and you can do that by stats, go to major change, and so on.

You won't always be right but you’re operating on a general Why—there was
a change. We suddenly failed to require something. Every once in a while you really
will be scattering around trying to find this.

This works in almost all situations to some degree, what change was there.
But we scatter all over the place. It has a liability. It tends to wipe out improve-
ments. If you go back to the point of high stuff all the time, all the time, all the
time, you’re pegging yourself into the same pattern where, as a matter of fact,
there might have been some better patterns. There might have been a better Why
in there than just a change of pattern.

NEW WHY

Once in a while you'll have found a Why and handled that, but find it keeps
slipping out again. For example, an org having to be told to keep in its FP No. 1.
FP No. | resulted from an evaluation of financial difficulties. That was a Why at
one time and has since become a standard action—but where you keep having to
say to an area “Get your FP No. | in”—now, WHY do you have to keep getting
in FP No. 1? The Why is not that FP No. | is out—we have gotten that in as
a practiced action. Why does it keep sliding out in this area? There could be
several things actually.

If you have to keep saying, “Get in C/S Series 25 so that you do have a D of
P so that people do come in and are invoiced and so forth,” you are obviously
running into a Why of why something keeps sliding out.

WHAT IS A RECOMMENDATION

What is a recommendation? Actually—usually—it would be recommended if
somebody else were going to execute it. You have a recommended program and
then from a recommended program you have an executed program, so at that
moment you shifted your hat. You’re no longer an evaluator, you’re an executor
or an executive.

160
If your evaluations, that wind up in Whys that wind up in recommendations,
are going to autonomously function—that is to say, singly and by itself function—
without regard to any other entity or activity, the next thing you know you’re
going to have fourteen or fifteen programs which are in direct collision which
will produce sufficient confusion to reduce the stats. Then you, yourself, will
wonder if you’ve found the right Why because it didn’t work. Whereas the reason
could be entirely different. The reason is your recommendation was in collision
with other Whys and recommendations and so operated to block other actions
which were vital to the continuous operation of an activity. You can kill your own
recommendation.

If you were in a position where you were going to independently of other
evaluators execute all your actions, you might wind up with a mess—you’ve got
your neck out as an evaluator.

The essence of a recommendation is “agreed-upon” and after there is a rec-
ommendation, there is an “agreed-upon” before there is execution.

An agreed-upon action means that you’d have to agree with other bodies of
data which people had—not their personality—other bodies of data. If you have
data which is contrary to an action which is being proposed, you could be put in
a position of cancelling or trying to cancel or recommending a cancellation of a
senior’s order. Therefore one has to have “agreed-upon” before execution.

When you are collecting data you have a torrent of data coming in. You are
collecting data, collecting data, collecting data, collecting data. If that data is not
evaluated, it is useless. It is just a useless expense. The only way that data is of
any value at all is if evaluations are done on it.

Any independent order given without the benefit of the other evaluations
would be a risk. It isn’t agreed upon person to person, it’s agreed upon data to
data. The only agreement would be on whether there is a situation or a no situ-
ation, a good situation or a bad situation or a no situation. There’d have to be
agreement on that point and there would have to be an agreement on the Why.
Only then could you get a coordinated recommendation.

EVALUATE

You’ve got to do evaluations. If you don’t do evaluations you’ll be insuffi-
ciently informed to be a competent agreer or disagreer. You’ll be insufficiently
informed to be sufficiently efficient to get the show on the road.

Take advantage of the tremendous volumes of data which come in and, by
doing evaluations, provide a sufficient running record of any and all existing situa-
tions in your line of country so that there is a general view of what is going on so
that the data can be looked at, looked up and one is sufficiently informed so that
he can make efficient judgments—and that will decrease the amount of work
done on this and that, that doesn’t really handle anything.

And it amounts to fewer orders which can then be enforced. It amounts to
prosperity because one of the Whys we find on occasion is that there are too
many orders drifting around which haven’t been executed. One winds up operat-
ing on somewhat of a jammed communication line just jammed by volume. The
guy that’s reading all this stuff is out there and he’s got noise and he’s got this

161
and they’ve got bill collectors and he’s got something else and so on. He never
has time to read it. He doesn’t know what the situation is and so forth.

One could also, without proper evaluation, easily issue an order into an area
with a hidden Why—which could destroy it.

And the speed of action determines the degree of loss—and that is a rule.
The speed of action also determines the degree of gain. And speed has a price.
An organization which is not doing well, its Why not accurately found for eight
months is a loss for eight months each succeeding week. If an organization should be
making fifteen thousand dollars and is only making two thousand dollars you’re
losing thirteen thousand a week every week that you don’t handle it. It’s speed of
gain or loss.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Revision assisted by
LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

162
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 17 MARCH 1977RA
Remimeo REVISED 2 NOVEMBER 1990

Data Series 42RA

DATE COINCIDENCE

(Extracted from an LRH talk to
Staff Aides on 18 May 72)

STATS AS THE FIRST INDICATOR

The first indicator is stats. If you were doing evaluations without looking at
stats, that would be silly. You can take a stat book of an org and look over its
GDSes and know their interrelationship and find the outpoint, and then from that
outpoint you will know what part of the org’s folder to read. If you are doing
evaluations by reading the whole folder, you’re being silly. You’re not interested
in that, you’re interested in this outpoint because that’s your first outpoint. Your
first outpoint always occurs in stats.

One outpoint, from stats, was “tremendous quantities of bulk mail being mailed
at vast cost after the stats had been brought up by phone regging, and then the
stats collapsed.” That was the first oddity that was noticed from some Dissem
stats. So it was a stat oddity. They were busy phone regging and they made a lot
of money, and then they spent it on bulk mail and went broke. So there was an
oddity here. It meant the GI did not match the bulk mail. So it’s an outpoint. It’s
inconsistent. Contradictory. Something’s false. So right there, you’re looking at a
great big cracking outpoint. One or the other of those facts is a lie, or some-
thing’s wrong. And we find out the real outpoint underlying it is wrong target.
It’s just number of pieces being sent out. They were mailing out fliers several
times a week—sending scraps and calling it bulk mail.

All right, so you got your first outpoint in your stats. Now, just the fact that
an org’s stats are down is an outpoint: An org has a monopoly on mental heal-
ing. It had no rivals of any kind whatsoever on the whole planet from one end to
the other. In fact they’ve got no rivals in the field of healing of any kind. What
the hell are they doing with their stats down?

So you look for a down stat. Having found a down stat you look to see if that
org ever did make money, if it was ever affluent. Just taking it from the standpoint of
GI, was this org ever affluent? /f the org was ever affluent, it must have been
doing something right so you’ve got something that approximates its ideal scene.

You haven’t approached data files yet. That’s why stats are separate from the
data files.

LOCATING A COMPARATIVE

So here are two conditions: (1) the stats are down, and (2) you can’t evaluate
one thing, as you learn in the Data Series, unless you have a comparative thing.

163
You have to compare it with something. So you can find a period when their stats
were up.

You find out that in July of 1969 Kokomo was really booming. It had nice
climbing stats and they went up and up and up and up and up. And that rise
started on the 6th of June. What did they do in May and June of 69? Those are
the two folders you want—anything you can find out about that org of May/June
69. That gives you something dimly resembling an ideal scene. It isn’t the ideal
scene, but it is certainly an upstat scene. That gives you a comparative.

If you were hot you would use your telex lines to fill in the missing holes.
For instance, if you don’t understand something or if it looked like they moved in
1970 and you can’t find out locally and you don’t seem to know whether or not
they did—and location seems to be something important here—you could send a
telex to somebody who might know and say, “Where were you located in June of
69? Where was this org located? Can you find out from anybody?” It might be
important you see. This is just a collection of a little bit more data. You know
that the org was doing something at that time that it isn’t doing now.

I did just this when I wrote the PL “Selling and Delivering Auditing.” I
looked back when HGCs were really making the money and wrote that PL. This
PL is in use in one org and they’re really going to town. They’re using the same
system. A guy comes in to sign up, they say, “No, you can’t sign up for one
intensive, thank you, you’ll have to buy seven,” or something. So he does; he
pays the money on the barrelhead. That PL comes out of a comparative—a com-
parative of HGCs not selling much auditing and having a hard time doing so, and
what they were doing in an earlier period.

So, when doing an evaluation (1) look at your stats, (2) find your outpoint in
the stats, (3) find some comparative—find some period of affluence for the org if
you can, to give you some ideal scene for that org. That requires something of a
pluspoint evaluation. Now you can do your outpoint evaluation. Because you’ ve
already got the outpoint, you don’t have to read 8,752 folders.

ETHICS SITUATION

A while back, I asked the Data Bureau for the folders of a particular down-
stat org. The first folder that came up wasn’t even a complete month’s folder. I
looked through the folder, read scraps of what I was reading, picked out the
reports I wanted, scanned them, pulled the outpoints out of them, counted up the
outpoints as to where they were going, and the thing just fell apart. And that was
that. It showed the CO was unaware of the fact that Personnel was letting him
down. That was their Admin Why. And obviously the CO had to take that person
in there off. And obviously there was something wrong with this CO. Now every
evaluation done on that org since is grooving straight on down that same Why.
We’ ve tried to make orders and we’ve tried to do this and we’ve tried to do that,
but now an ethics situation has developed out of the thing. We got the Admin
Why all right, but an ethics situation developed as we tried to get this in. And
notice that THE ETHICS SITUATION DEVELOPS WHEN YOU TRY TO GET
IN THE ADMIN OR TECH WHY. So you don’t necessarily have your Admin or
Tech Why in the first three minutes of play.

In another area the ethics situation developed to such a degree that it then
emerged—after an observation mission, after a handling was done and orders

164
were directly issued—that they did not execute a single one of them. They were
told to revert. They did not. Therefore an Ethics Why was looked for.

Now I’ve just found out why people can't put in ethics. They don’t know
investigatory tech, and possibly in some cases their own ethics are out. If you put
their own ethics in, they will get in ethics further. The reason they assign broad
conditions and the reason there are so many Comm Evs is they don’t know how
to investigate.

WHO WHEN

Someone was given an evaluation to do and had been on that for five days. I
kept asking all this time, ““Where’s this evaluation?” People must think I'm rush-
ing them. Evaluators are slow because the evaluation is not being done in this
sequence: (1) stats, (2) who was on where.

I gave an order to an evaluator to find out exactly when did a certain person
come to Flag, and exactly when did the person go back because that would give
you a stat comparison. That was how I found this person was the man-of-all-work
and the scooting genius of that org. Now you’re talking about ethics; it’s the
police action called date coincidence. It’s how you locate geniuses and murderers.
Body found in swamp. Her cousin arrived in town on Tuesday. Body found on
Wednesday. Guy departed on Thursday. That’s all the police need. That’s called
date coincidence. That’s old-time investigatory tech. It’s still with us.

So, when were they gone out of the org, and when did they arrive back in
the org, and what happened during that period of time? Important!

In the case of this particular person, I found out that two other execs could
leave the org and return and nothing happened—but when this person left, the
roof fell in, the front steps collapsed under everybody and the staff went on
vacation. I traced this down and I found out that she would run around the org
wearing hats in rotation. She dived into the Tech area and wore the Tech Sec hat
for a while, and then she dived into another area and she wore that hat for a
while and the stats would go up. In other words, she supported that area by
punching one area at a time. That was the way she was operating. So if she was
all over the org like that, her obvious post was Deputy CO. We put her on that
post and the org has done well ever since.

Now that’s a sort of ethics action in reverse. That’s looking for who really
pushes it. You don’t just keep on looking for tigers. Tigers are probably more
numerous than geniuses, but you could find that certain people have a vast effect
on stats. This is how you evaluate a personnel scene. In another org, a guy took
over and the place has been crashed ever since and it was right square on the
stats. There is your most obvious ethics investigation by stats.

When you don’t know, you’ve got to send an investigatory mission and it’s
got to be run well. Otherwise they just wind up shooting all the people that the
staff complain about.

If you don’t operate on a comparison every time—comparison on Admin
Why, comparison on the stats, ethics comparisons—if you’re trying to operate on
a single datum, that single datum won’t buy you any pie because it has nothing to
compare with.

165
SUMMARY

What the Data Bureau gives us is experience. And that is huge files full of
experience. But you've got to recognize what you're reading. You don't read
everything! If you do you’re omitting an analysis of the GDSes and an analysis
of who went on when and where at a good time and a bad time.

What are you looking for? You're looking for the stat. Look at your GDSes.
This is for your Admin Whys. That tells you the big outpoint, that tells you what
information you’re looking for in the files—and you’re only interested in that
information. You start counting up that type of information and see where it
lands, and the Why will practically jump out at you out of the folder. It is so
easy! It just leaps right out. But you have to know what you’re looking at.

In writing up one eval an evaluator verbally gave me more valuable data than
she had put into the eval. She was quoting reports. All you want to do is quote
the steps of your investigation.

You have a criterion when you’ve got your evaluation all done: your handling
has got to be bright—it’s got to be a bright idea that will actually drive those
stats up—and something which can be operated. And if you do an evaluation that
cannot be operated at this stage of the game, you’re just wasting your time. Look
at your resources. What can you do with what you’ve got while you improve what
you've got? It will all have to be done by a gradient. So the worse off things are
the brighter you have to be.

When you do evaluations you’ve got to be able to operate the resulting
actions. If you write something that can’t be operated nothing will happen. That
at once tells you whether you have a good evaluation or a bad evaluation.

Do your evaluations in such a way that they are dead on—bang! bang!
bang!—and then, that being the case, they have got to be something that can be
operated. And the next thing you know your stats will go up.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Revision assisted by
LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

166
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 18 MARCH 1977RA
Remimeo REVISED 6 NOVEMBER 1990

Data Series 43RA

EVALUATION AND PROGRAMS

(Extracted from an LRH talk to the
Flag Programs Bureau on 28 Sept. 73)

CAUSING STATS

I’ve learned this over the years: The entirety of our stats are internally
caused. WE CAN CAUSE STATS AT WILL. External actions don’t affect them.

A newspaper can write reams of entheta and it doesn’t affect our stats at all.
We get good publicity—it doesn’t affect our stats. It’s totally internal.

The public demand is apparently exactly as great as we put the wherewithal
in their hands with which to demand—apparently exactly proportional. You get
as great a response as you require.

Therefore, the more efficient your org is, the greater response you will get.
It’s that elementary.

The test of an evaluator or executive is: ““Can you get your org to do a
constructive thing at once without any backflash or any nonsense, and will it
occur in such a way as to increase stats promptly?” If so, you’re a good admin-
istrator. If you can’t do that, we have all kinds of paint to scrape.

It’s just that: The guy can produce an effect or he can't.

And if you run a managing body that way, all of a sudden the staff will get
happy and cheerful producing effects; everything will be fine—because they'll
become at cause.

That is the essence of hatting. The person can then come up to cause and
he’ll get sane, productive and cheerful.

Actually, it takes a very able guy to do an administrative line. A ditchdigger
has to have a solid line of his arm and a shovel, and that’s as far as he can
produce an effect. That’s why he’s a ditchdigger.

Now, for a guy to produce an effect at 7,000 miles without any solid
beam—he has to be right on the ball. He has to know his business.

SPEED OF EVALUATION

There was once a situation in an org which was very interesting. Apparently
the ED was stopping the reports of the LRH Comm and Flag Rep, so no one was

167
about to find out what was going on in that org. But if the manager had been on
the ball, all he would have had to do was to look at that data file and find those
reports missing and know that there was something wrong—and it would have
been detected a long time before.

What you're up against is that most of your evaluation is on omission, and
the toughest outpoint for anybody who is not familiar with the scene to recognize
is an omission.

THE SPEED OF RECOGNIZING OUTPOINTS DETERMINES THE
SPEED WITH WHICH ONE CAN EVALUATE.

You wonder why it takes people so long to evaluate. It is simply that they are
too slow in recognizing an outpoint.

THE INABILITY TO RECOGNIZE AN OUTPOINT IS REASONABLE-
NESS.

It’s that thing, reasonableness. We’ve been talking about it for years. That's
just the inability to recognize an outpoint.

There was a fellow out in the field saying, “I think we have done all right in
the past” —meaning “without the Data Series” —“‘in our thinking and planning.~
He didn’t think he had to take a Data Series course or something. Whereas I was
literally getting rivers of outpoints from him and his area. He didn’t recognize
them as such.

Well, what he didn’t appreciate is that this is a brand-new way of thinking.
Man prides himself on being logical so that he has never based any system on
illogic—except humor. You have to learn to think backwards—you learn to think
backwards, and boy can you think forwards. It’s like a dichotomy, positive—negative.
If everybody omits the negative all the time, they never get to the positive.

A lot of people are on a stuck flow of being sensible and sane—and that
winds up in stupidity. So they get reasonable. Their confront of evil isn’t up to
it—basically, their confront of outpoints.

THE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE OUTPOINTS WILL EXACTLY MONITOR
THE SPEED OF EVALUATION AND THE ABILITY TO HANDLE THE
SCENE.

An evaluator cannot say, when he hasn’t received any reports for 2!
months, that he doesn’t know what to do because he hasn’t received any reports.
He’d better be able to recognize an omitted report when he sees one and that
there is a situation and he had better take action to remedy that situation NOW.

INACTIVITY

Now, nobody ever does nothing. They never do nothing. You have to look
around to find out what he IS doing.

If it’s an exec who can’t get juniors to produce, he could probably be putting

a stop on production lines. A Why is findable to such a situation. That’s proba-
bly an ethics scene. But you still will find a Why. You always find a Why for the

168
situation. In other words, he has a personal situation of some kind or another. He
might be able to function, himself, as a junior or he might not—but for a guy to
sit there with completely idle staff members and not notice it, with their areas
wrapped around a telegraph pole, is quite reprehensible.

In investigating one inactive Esto, I found out she was operating under an
order that she was not to bait and badger until she was trained on it—and there
were probably many other things she “was not permitted to do.”” She accepted an
illegal order not to do certain Esto actions. We found one and probably, if we had
investigated further, we would find more. In the first place, if anybody has read
the Esto Serics, he’d find out that you are an Esto (it says it right in the begin-
ning) and that’s it. It doesn’t matter if the guy has studied it or not studied it,
he’s an Esto and he’s supposed to do the job. So it was a violent policy violation
as well as keeping someone from doing her job.

EXPANSION PROGRAM

An expansion program is for getting an org built. It’s based on an evaluation
for that org. There is a way you could go about this. Suppose you wrote Kokomo
and said, “What should be done about Kokomo?” You get a bunch of answers
from the whole staff—compulsory answer, not a couple of guys. Evaluate from
that what their tone level and that sort of thing is. And you could then form up,
based squarely on policy and forming the org, an expansion program.

The expansion program is actually a very basic org rudiment function, but
which would be adapted to that org, and within the reality of that org. It’s highly
specialized and it’s terminable. The person executing it, when he gets through
with the thing—that’s the end of that one. Now let’s get another entirely new
program.

You could actually do it on a blanket basis where each org was treated as an
individual org. Then you’d know what policies to get in in this org. You just ask
them, ““What should be done about Kokomo?” “What should be done about
Keokuk?” —they’ll tell you. Then you could go down to your Data Files and do
an evaluation for the expansion program.

You can thus use knowledge of the org’s troubles and the staff interviews as
the basis for an evaluation.

There has to be an immediate organization for production, according to the
prod—org system. However, long-range, long-term organization actions have got
to be done by somebody because the prod—org system tears an org to ribbons.
There’s got to be somebody putting an org there who’s not directly involved in
that immediate scene. He’s got to put it there adroitly enough so that what he
puts there expands its production so as to pay for the additional organization.

It’s quite neat, that type of program. As they get executed along the line,
they wind up with an increased production. Every three or four targets that are
done, why, all of a sudden you’ve got more production. There could be some
good long-range targets like “Get 30 auditors” —probably could take a year or
more to exhaust such a target.

169
But note—such an expansion program wouldn't go on your production pro-
gram execution lines at all. Your long-term organizational actions go on another
line than your immediate production actions.

PRODUCTION PROGRAM

Such a program is something concerned with handling an immediate situa-
tion which had to do with immediate production—right now. Such as:

WHY: Division 6 doing all the sign-ups for Division 2.
HANDLING: 1. Get a Registrar on post in Division 2, right now.

2. Then get an Advanced Scheduling Registrar on post im-
mediately.

3. Then get three letter writing Registrars on post at once.
4. Get them functioning, production, immediately.
It's a “right now” scene.

A short-term production program ought to expire within thirty days—it be-
comes staledated within thirty days. Some of them become staledated within ten
or fifteen days. So you need a very hot, very fast line of very quick compliance.

It already takes quite a while for the reports to get to the files through the
mail so that you know what the situation is. You’re already ten days behind the
gun—ten days, two weeks late. And then it’s going to take maybe another week
to get it assembled—to know that there is a situation and evaluate it and get it
through and ready. So you’re operating on about a three-week average comm lag.
You have to make up for it at the other end of the line—get this thing done
now, now, now.

If you’ve got a Flag Rep there, the Flag Rep will get it done.

The eval probably will not save the bacon of an org for the next two years. It
will be lucky if it keeps the stats bolstered for six weeks—then something else
will go out. By that time, why, Div 6 will have become completely confused
because it is not now being permitted to do all the registration of the org, so
therefore it would have gone out of existence, and the Registrar would have left,
so now we would have to evaluate and handle Division 6.

It goes ticktock, from one situation to another.

There are different types of evaluation. There’d be a divisional evaluation.
There could even be a departmental evaluation. There could be an org evalua-
tion, an executive level evaluation and so on.

You could have several evaluations going at the same time, but they would
have to be different divisions or areas, otherwise you’d cross up like mad. Nor-
mally speaking and in theory, that would be possible. But in fact a competent
evaluation would find the imbalance between divisions.

170
The operative word is current evaluation. You could push a current evalua-
tion. How wide is present time? Well, that’s a matter of judgment, but a year-old
evaluation would be pretty much not current.

You should be able to turn out an evaluated program that applies to Podunk
Org and get it executed forcefully and they would start flying. And then you
should be able to do an evaluation on the policy missing in such and such an org
and be able to issue it on the LRH Comm line and get them pushing right
straight up the line into a form of org and a production basis.

If you can put evaluated programs out on those two lines: the production
program going to the Flag Rep, the expansion program going to the LRH
Comm, you’ve got it made. And if you’ve got anything else standing in the road
of that you should get rid of it. And that’s the way the orgs would boom.

FIRST TARGET

Your first program target must always be a production target—but you can’t,
in actual fact, write a pure production target. It would be impossible to write a
pure production target because somebody would have to do it, and the moment
that you have somebody there to do it you have organization. So there is a certain
amount of organization that comes into it.

If I were evaluating an org right now, say its Dept 7, I would have to include
in it as its second target, beefing up Dept 7. First target would be for Dept 7 to
do anything it could to handle its collections. And the second target would be to
beef up that department forthwith, bang, bang! Otherwise the production would
not continue. It would break.

So, as mentioned earlier, there has to be immediate organization for production.

TERMINABLE TARGETS
Now, how do you like a target like this: “Maintain friendly relations with the
environment.” How do you like that target? It is utterly completely not a doing-
ness target. It isn’t a target at all!

Now, if it said: ‘““Call on so-and-so, and so-and-so and make them aware of
your presence . . .”” and so forth, it could have a DONE on it.

Targets should be terminable—doable, finishable, completable.
REPEATING TARGETS
There is such a thing as a repeating target. You can accomplish it many
times—it’s like when you do org rudiments. Every time they do one of those
targets a compliance is added to the compliance stat.
This is especially true of some targets in expansion programs.

FOUR-PRONGED ACTION

In operating orgs, you’ve got a four-pronged action, a division of duties:

171
— We’ve got the form of the org and its basic policy and tech being driven
in by the LRH Comm. The LRH Comm is gunning these orgs up to expand. You
have to get in certain structural functional actions for an org to expand. So you’ve
got the LRH Comm working on founding and expanding the org against produc-
tion, for real. She isn’t organizing for nothing; she is organizing those important
parts of it. So you could do an evaluation for an expansion program, and the
LRH Comm could sit there and beat that program in, and that program mostly
has to do with policy. This is your long-term organization.

— The Flag Rep drives in the production programs that remedy the current
situation and production actions. Those programs are based on evaluations of the
current status of an org from the viewpoint of production, not from a viewpoint
of its organization. You do have to do a certain amount of organization to get any
production, but it’s short-term organization.

— You've got the general org being run on its day-to-day basis by what was
once known as the Assoc Sec and is now the ED.

— You’ve got the Office of Special Affairs handling the public and accept-
ability of Scientology, handling the public, handling legal and handling other
things. They’re outward facing.

There you have your four-pin structure of your org drive. Those lines go very
sleek.
L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
Revision assisted by

LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

172
Remimco

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 18 MARCH 1977-IR

ADDITION OF 20 MARCH 1977
REVISED 14 JUNE 1977

Data Series 43-IR

EVALUATION SUCCESS

(Taken from ED 552 Flag,
4 Nov. 74, EVALUATION SUCCESS)

To show that evals on individual orgs and getting programs done DOES raise
stats the following brief review is published:

Around mid-July 1974 I got on the eval approval lines for about a week and
had orgs of one continent evaluated by some Flag evaluators.

We got several evals through, severely according to the Data Series rules.

Here are the results of 7 of them.

1.
2.

Program was reported fully done. Stats went up.

18 July eval. Pgm was almost fully done. Finance got bugged. Org
crashed 22 Aug. 74.

22 July eval. By 15 Aug. stats had gone UP.

21 July 74 eval but not started on until 26 Sept. 74 as Study Manuals
were delayed on which eval depended. Org stats after eval began to be
done went UP and by the end of Oct. hit highest ever almost across the
boards.

20 July 74 eval. Started on 10 Aug. 74. Half-done. By 24 Oct. stats
went UP.

23 July 74 issue. Bugged. Not completed. Stats went up first couple
weeks. Org crashed 24 Oct. 74. (Eval was also cross-ordered by removal
of CO.)

23 July 74. Three-quarters done. Stats went UP.

Thus 5 out of 7 of the above evals were successful.

The 2 that failed were obviously insufficiently broad as other matters got in
the way of them. The evaluator could not have had the real situation. Means not
enough preliminary work to find the area that should have been evaluated.

173
VERBAL TECH
Verbal tech on a DSEC should be severely handled if found.

Note that the evals as above were very purely supervised referring only to
departures from the Data Series PLs.

Pure eval per Data Series 33RB was the push on getting the evals done. |
was simply demanding full Data Series PL application.

The reason for verbal tech is Mis-U words!

FAILING EVALS
It is pretty easy to tell if an eval is getting done or if it is failing. The two
poor evals in the 7 just weren’t watched fast enough by the evaluators. You cancel
a failing eval fast and do a better one.

Failing to cancel or redo a failing eval on an org would be the real reason for
that org continuing to go down.

SUMMARY

If you got 5/7ths of all our orgs purely evaluated, no nonsense with verbal
tech, you would have booming Int stats!

Just like pcs—unprogramed pcs fail—and pcs audited with hearsay tech fail!
Orgs without evaluated, pushed programs for that org tend to fail. And evaluations
done on hearsay tech are a waste of paper.

How about it?

A boom or crash.

It’s up to YOU.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

174
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 20 MARCH 1977R
Remimeo REVISED 15 JUNE 1977

Data Series 44R

SUPER EVALUATION

(Taken from LRH OODs item of 15 Oct. 73)

I have examined four evaluations recently and have found in each case that
the evaluator had not gone to the trouble of looking in obvious places for data.

In each of these cases, personnel whose personnel folders had not been
looked into and whose ethics files had not been examined were concerned. In the
last one, a person was being proposed for promotion to a high executive position
in an org while the stats for the past week demonstrated that his area was seri-
ously downstat, the matter even being mentioned on the current battle plans.

It is not how much you read, it is where you look. In the data files, if one is
examining the statistics of a division, one does not read all manner of reports
from other divisions and other personnel. One has to be selective and right target
to get his data.

Statistics (as fully outlined in statistical management PLs) are the dominant
factors in an evaluation, and most evaluations begin on the basis of statistics
which are either sufficiently high to merit examination so as to be reinforced, or
are too low to be viable. These read in conjunction with other statistics usually
give you an org situation.

When one discovers a series of outpoints, there is generally a situation un-
derlying them.

From the statistical trail, or the gross outpoint trail, one can locate a situa-
tion. The situation is then evaluated by looking for and finding the exact data
which applies to that situation. From this one can find his Why, and once this is
found he can get a bright idea.

A program can then ensue which terminatedly handles that situation.

Evaluations cannot be done in any other way. The moment that you apply
humanoid think to the subject of evaluation, you lose.

In the last evaluation I looked over, the evaluator obviously had not gone to
personnel files, data files or any other files but had simply read some PR des-
patches written by the guy himself and had taken single-source data and decided
to promote the person to the control of an area. Statistics demonstrated at once
that the person’s stats were down, that practice evaluations done on that very org
existed, and that the ethics and personnel files of that person would never have

175
suggested any promotion and on the contrary would have suggested demotion.
This would have made a very dangerous situation in the area, would have victim-
ized a great many good people, and would have played hell with Flag statistics.

Persons “evaluating” without having looked at the vital data concerned with
their evaluation are subject to a Court of Ethics on the charge of FALSE EVAL-
UATION.

While this might be looked on some as a deterrent to evaluating at all when
evaluations are vital, remember that it is better to handle one person, the evaluator,
than to tie up and maul a thousand people with a program based on a false Why.

Evaluations not only can be done but are quite magical in handling things
when the evaluator knows what he is doing and when he looks for the informa-
tion he needs to evaluate in the places where that information exists.

It is out of correct and brilliant evaluation that high stats are made.

We have superlative tools, we must use them right.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

176
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 27 SEPTEMBER 1978

Remimeo

Data Series 45
EXAMINING RESOURCES

One of the reasons evaluations fail is because the evaluator does not take
stock of resources.

It is vital that you examine resources when evaluating before you plunge into
any handling, and resources belongs just above handling on the evaluation form.

Resources sometimes turn out not what they seemed, so when I say. “examine
resources” I mean look into them searchingly. Were you ever sure that you had
$50.00 in the bank and $20.00 in a teapot only to find on closer examination that
you were overdrawn at the bank and the teapot contained an IOU whose signature
you couldn’t read?

Sometimes you think you have resources you don’t have even when there is
total agreement on every hand that you have resources. Take for instance Clerk
X. It is “common knowledge” that he has been around “Department 5” for years
and is a “good clerk.” So you make him head of the department without going
down and inspecting his area. What will happen to your evaluation and “Depart-
ment 5” if that undone inspection would have revealed unfiled backlogs 10 feet
high, lost supplies and equipment and an office mainly used for plotting muti-
nies? This may be an extreme case but some shadow of it lies behind most failed
evaluations. The evaluator just didn’t examine his resources and thought he had
what he didn’t have.

There is one type of program you can always predict will fail, it begins
“Hire a ___”- or “Recruit a ____————.””. When sending a mission out
on such orders, you know you won’t hear from them for 6 months because the
program has said, in effect, “acquire nonexisting resources.”

If you do an evaluation on almost any subject and omit an examination of
resources and the resources section, your evaluation may lay an ostrich egg.
“Appoint Joe Blow, who is a trained Personnel Officer,” may trip over the fact
that he left the company 5 months ago and has not been heard from since.
The eval will bug at this point. That is because the evaluator didn’t examine
resources.

You sometimes have to gear down your bright idea and handling from “Buy
Wall Street” to “Set up a peanut vender stand on Bleaker Street.’”’ But the point
is your evaluation will succeed where otherwise it will fail.

Almost all evaluations actually have the overall goal of preserving or acquir-
ing resources. So don’t omit an examination of the resources you do have to
work with and their accurate and exact character from your evals.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

177
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 4 JANUARY 1979

Remimeo

Data Series 46

THE IDEAL IDEAL SCENE

Have you realized that if you have an incorrect Ideal Scene, your program
will be wrong?

In using the Data Series, some evaluators tend to toss off the Ideal Scene as
a sort of afterthought— possibly because it is part of the form of evals. To do so
can be quite fatal to the success of the eval—and it can result in the wrong Ideal
Scene!

So always work out the Ideal Scene with care. THAT is what you are trying
to achieve with your eval.

HOMEWORK ON THE IDEAL SCENE

We know that homework may be necessary for the data section. But have you
ever thought that the Ideal Scene may also require homework?

I recall a ship’s galley once that couldn’t get itself unscrambled. So the
cooks and stewards were sent over on a tour of a posh cruise liner. They were
amazed at what a real ship's galley could look like. They had seen an Ideal
Scene. Until then they didn’t know why they were being harassed by the officers.
They got it.

If you can imagine Sitting Bull, the famous Indian war chief, trying to eval-
uate “Queen Victoria’s last grand ball failed” as a situation, you would see that
his eval was likely to be rejected. For he wouldn’t have had a clue what the ball
SHOULD have looked like. But, as Sitting Bull was a pretty smart Indian, if he
had done his homework on the Ideal Scene of a Queen’s grand ball, I am sure
the eval would not only have passed but the NEXT grand ball would have been a
howling success!

So homework is often quite vital on the Ideal Scene.
Not only can a person establish what an Ideal Scene SHOULD be, he can

also establish what it COULD be and that may be a long way ahead of old
accepted Ideal Scenes.

EVALING FROM THE IDEAL SCENE

It is possible (and often very necessary) to “evaluate backwards”; that is to
say, to START with the Ideal Scene.

178
If you have something you want to bring about—some Ideal Scene you
desire—and simply shuffle off toward it, don’t be surprised if you never get there
or achieve it. The realities and conflicts of life have a habit of intervening. What
they call the “vanishing illusions of youth” occur simply because youth, thirsting
to be a movie star or a great lover or a fireman, seldom sits down and does a
thorough eval first that finds the barriers that will permit a program that will work.

If one sets up an Ideal Scene as an ambition—such as the org booming—it
may just stay an ambition one remembers in his old age instead of a concrete
occurrence UNLESS one does a backwards eval on it.

One does one of these “backwards evals” without any situation in mind. In
other words, one does not have to have a sit in order to start the eval. (And you
are aware of course that most evals begin because a sit leaps up and has to be
handled.) So, without a sit, one simply puts down the Ideal Scene one is hopeful
of achieving. Then he finds the most glaring departure from the Ideal Scene.
That is his sit. And he also may find as he works that he gets several sits and
several versions of the principal Ideal Scene which in turn become THE Ideal
Scene he had in mind in the first place.

There is a simple view of it: Just set the Ideal Scene, find the furthest depar-
ture from it, use that as the sit and then, gathering data and doing a regular eval,
he will find WHY that Ideal Scene hasn’t occurred or won’t occur, then he can
realistically program it to handle and the Ideal Scene WILL occur if the program
is done.

One can take the more complex view of it: One sets the Ideal Scene, finds
the furthest departure from it, follows a data trail, discovers there is more than
one sit and so has a multiple-sit eval, each one with a different version of the
Ideal Scene but these Idea] Scenes adding up to his original concept of the Ideal
Scene.

Let us take a simple example. The major purpose of a directive to a sales-
man is “Sell the ballpark.” Now, if we simply told him to do that, we would be
relying on his charm and luck and while these might be quite good we are likely
to get a failed salesman. A more sensible approach would be to convert that
major purpose to the Ideal Scene of ‘‘The ballpark sold at a profit.” Then find
and take the widest departure from that Ideal Scene which possibly is ‘‘We have
been trying to sell the ballpark for two years with no takers.” Then we employ
the standard steps of the Data Series and find the real Why, which could be
“Nobody ever compiled a list of the people who buy ballparks or approached
them.” And we do a program based on the Why and Ideal Scene and THEN we
can give the salesman that program and that major target and BANG, we sell the
ballpark at a profit. As it could have been any one of a thousand Whys, we could
have gotten a thousand different programs, all of which would probably have
failed BECAUSE no evaluation was done.

So do not send to find why missions fail or projects collapse. Just notice that
one didn’t take what was desired and make it into an Ideal Scene and evaluate it
backwards.

To always need a catastrophic sit in order to evaluate is to ask for more and
more sits to occur as it is sort of an outpoint-correct but by evaluation. Of

179
course, when sits exist, it is vital to evaluate them. But realize also that when you
don’t see what you consider an Ideal Scene, you can simply set it and evaluate
back from it as above.

And realize, too, that this is a great way to make dreams come true.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

180
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 7 JUNE 1979R

Remimeo Issue |
REVISED 14 JUNE 1979

Data Series 47

DATA SERIES PLs, USE OF

It is hereby illegal to randomly place Data Series PLs on a checksheet of any
kind.

The Data Series PLs must be studied in sequence.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Assisted by
LRH Pers Comm

181
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 26 DECEMBER 1979

Remimeo
DSEC
Evaluators

Data Series 48

EXECUTION OF EVALUATIONS

It is hereafter mandatory that every eval must carry in the policy section the
following statement:

Nothing in this eval may be interpreted to violate or alter or
change HCO PLs or HCOBs. Anyone executing a target in this
eval in such a way as to violate or alter any HCO PL or HCOB
will be actionable by Comm Ev. Any recommendation in this
eval for change of policy or tech must be cleared by the Watch-
dog Committee (WDC) before being placed in the eval as a
target and resulting PL or bulletin must be reviewed by the
Founder personally. All data or handlings where they refer to
policy or bulletins must give the policy or bulletin number and
its location and text verbatim.

Any violation of this policy will be actionable by Comm Ev. This policy is
retroactive to all published evals whether they are remimeoed or not.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

182
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 OCTOBER 1982

Remimeo

Data Series 49

WHY THINGS ARE EVALUATED

A great mistake can be made if one assumes he has to evaluate everything
before he can act. No way! One has to understand why things are evaluated.

Things are evaluated when they have to be corrected.

When one is building something based on tech and experience, one simply
programs it and does it. That’s it, simple as that.

One builds a car to fill the lack of cars. That is the sit. The Why is simply
that one is not building so there are none. So one builds the cars.

Only when the car does not get driven or worse, does not sell, does one
EVALUATE for blood.

If evaluation is used to delay putting something there or getting something
done (just plain putting it there and forcing it to run) then you get a misuse of
evaluation.

You don’t have to evaluate to get a gang of men to move iron pipe. You get
a gang, you tell them to move it. If they do it too slowly, you tell them to move
it faster.

Where is the evaluation? Sit: Iron pipe needs moving. Program: Move it!

When one can’t confront handling something, he can say, “I have to evaluate
this situation,” take six months and no iron pipes get moved!

Imagine a sergeant on the battlefield with the enemy in his teeth saying
to himself, “I cannot tell my men to shoot for I have not had an okay on an
evaluation.”” You get defeated troops.

Now when this sergeant, seeing the enemy charge, issues a silly order like
“Dig latrines,” one can also say he did not evaluate. But I wouldn’t. I’d say he
didn’t have good sense.

So don’t use “evaluation” (a very valuable tool) to avoid telling people to do
their jobs. And don’t buy that you have to evaluate everything before you can act.

Why do you evaluate? You evaluate when you’ve got some situation which is
nonroutine and doesn’t resolve and doesn’t resolve to a debug.

Why do you debug something? You debug something when it doesn’t move
along as expected or when it doesn’t move along at an expected rate.

183
The normal way of going about things is to program.
When something isn’t running along as expected, you debug it.

When something won’t resolve to a debug, when something is consistently
bogged, you evaluate.

You can get slowed like mad in trying to handle something if you don’t have
these straight.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

184
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 28 MARCH 1984

Remimeo Issue [
Data Series
Evaluator Checksheet
Exec Councils
Execs
All Management
Echelons

Data Series 50

THE STAGES OF ANALYSIS

Occasionally one sees “stat analyses” which deal mainly in substantive in-
formation which is already known. Such “analyses” do not exclusively approach
stats as stats. When done this way they are commentaries on what the person
doing them hopes to do and handlings rather than a stat analysis.

A manager or a management unit actually cripples itself when it does not do
a stat analysis exactly by the stats. A management echelon can get so wrapped
up in programs that it doesn’t view the right now of the scene. What’s being
omitted is an actual stat analysis of the overall scene for which that manager or
management group is responsible, and as a consequence huge situations can go
on undetected. One must do a weekly stat analysis of the scene based solely and
totally on stats, quite in addition to ongoing actions. Without a standard stat
analysis one can go adrift and separate from the reality of the activity.

There are actually three distinct types of data or action concerning it.

1. Substantive information gained from observation and missions and so
forth—this is the continuous flow of information that comes in to a man-
agement area as, if it is on the ball and has its comm lines open, it
gathers a lot of general running information.

2. Stat analysis—this deals exclusively in stats, their comparison and ex-
pectancies: With it you can spot right in on what is right and what is
wrong with orgs or activities.

3. Data evaluation—this puts (1) and (2) together and from it one gets con-
clusions, but more importantly, carried to full evaluation, one gets the
reasons why things are going up or going down.

A manager may sometimes tend to commingle all three levels and not do a
pure stat analysis. Of course one should do all three above, but one should not
fall into the habit of calling something a “stat analysis” which is flavored with
(1) and (3) above.

A stat analysis is a sort of purity all in itself: It tells one where to look and
alerts one to success or failures of ongoing activities and without a pure stat
analysis one cannot then intelligently handle (1) above and cannot confirm (3)
above. Stat analysis is the core of management, somewhat like the meters on the

185
dash panel of a car one is driving. Stats tell you (providing they are correctly
worded and assigned and if they are correctly reported) the reality of the scene.
And one can even spot false or incorrectly worded or assigned stats.

Skill in doing a pure stat analysis, uncolored by (1) and (3) above is vital to
an exec. It can be acquired. And really must be.

Stat analyses verify or dispute (1) above. Where an exec issues any order at
all he is actually doing a bit of (3) above.

If he cannot do (2) above he will find himself wrong targeting, issuing need-
less orders and inevitably will mess up no matter how well intentioned or clever
he may be.

I run by graphs and that is the secret of how I can spot things while a long
way away with a minimum of data.

Graphs and stat analysis are the heart and soul of management.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

186
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 5 NOVEMBER 1990

Remimeo

DSEC Evaluators
Ethics Officers
DSEC Supervisors
Cramming Officers

Data Series 51

O/Ws AND EVALUATION

Refs:
HCO PL 12 June 72R Data Series 26R
Rev. 24.6.88 LENGTH OF TIME TO EVALUATE
HCOB 3 Feb. 79 II CONFRONT TECH HAS TO BE
PART OF THE TR CHECKSHEET
HCOB 2 Mar. 84R O/W WRITE-UPS
Rev. 24.4.90

Evaluation is a precise tech, applicable to any field or endeavor. It can, how-
ever, be made complex, and when this occurs, evals drag on, never get done and
leave bad situations dangerously unhandled or the reasons for good situations
unknown.

Vital data has turned up on people who cannot evaluate an area. It has been
proven conclusively that when this occurs, they have overts and withholds con-
cerning the area. When these are cleaned up, it has been proven they can evaluate
the area.

THEORY
O/Ws prevent confront; where one can’t confront, they can’t evaluate.

It has also been revealed that the withhold is the onset of complexity and that
it is capable of keeping a person from thinking. An evaluator may start thinking
about the withhold in some reactive way, instead of thinking about the eval. He
may not even realize that he had the withhold. This is quite a complex scene
which brings to light the fact that the withhold makes a person incapable of being
logical and that it is probably withholds that make man so complex. So there
may be an entrance point here on simplicity-complexity because people with
withholds get complex.

HANDLING

It is operating tech that overts and withholds on the subject area of the evalu-
ation prevent the evaluator from evaluating. It is vivid that failed evaluators have
overts and withholds in abundance. This gives one a method and handling not
only for evaluators but also students on a Data Series Evaluator’s Course.

In such circumstances, the handling is to get the evaluator to write up his
overts and withholds on the area he is trying to evaluate or any related area and
get them meter checked for completeness.

187
The procedure is as follows:

a. Determine the area on which the evaluator should write up his O/Ws.
This could be the area he is attempting to evaluate or any related area.

b. He writes up his overts and withholds to completion, following all of the
steps of HCOB 2 Mar. 84R, O/W WRITE-UPS, including the end ruds
check.

c. Once finished with step (b), the evaluator is then crammed on the errors
made in the evaluation.

d. When the cramming is complete, the eval is properly done.

For example, an evaluator received numerous rejects on an eval regarding an
org’s premises and its Estates Branch. He had proposed off-policy actions and
was not confronting the out-ethics in the Estates Branch which would have caused
any eval handling to fail. He wrote up his overts and withholds on all estates
matters, buildings, etc., then received cramming on the evaluation so it could be
properly done.

REMEDIES AND CAUTIONS
1. Incorrectly administered O/W write-ups

If an evaluator doing this action bogs, falls on his head, refuses to continue
to write up his O/Ws, etc., he is to get repaired at once by a qualified auditor
using a Confessional Repair List.

2. Cramming and overts

Cramming Officers must be cognizant of the fact that cramming would not
do any good up against overts. When the indicators of O/Ws on the subject are
present as described earlier in this policy letter, the Cramming Officer would
first require that the evaluator write up his O/Ws per the procedure given above
before cramming, so the person could receive maximum benefit from the cram-
ming actions done.

3. Additional corrective tools

There can be other factors that slow or stall an evaluator from completing an
evaluation. Cramming Officers, C/Ses and executives have a number of other
tools available to handle a bugged evaluator, such as application of HCO PL 12
June 72R, LENGTH OF TIME TO EVALUATE, HC Lists, all methods of Word
Clearing, Crashing Mis-U Finding, False Data Stripping and so on.

These corrective actions can and should be done when warranted in order to
get an evaluator rapidly completing standard evaluations.

SUMMARY
O/Ws prevent evaluation. Cleaning up evaluators of their overts and with-

holds in the subject area being evaluated can unjam this problem, not only making
evaluators but also debugging slow or no evaluations.

188
Use this tech and reap the benefits of rapid evaluations done purely per the
Data Series which handle situations and accomplish ideal scenes.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
Compilation assisted by

LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

189
THE ORGANIZING SERIES
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 13 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue II
Exec Dir Hat

HES Hat

HAS Hat

Org Series 1

BASIC ORGANIZATION

What is organization?

Most people have so many associated ideas with the word “organization”
that they think of one as an identity or a being, not as a dynamic activity.

Let’s see what one really is.

Let us take a pile of red, white and blue beads. Let’s organize them.
Now let us draw the org board.

Let us dump them all on top of in-charge, all mixed up in a confusion.

Obviously in-charge must route them to dig himself out. So we get:

Red White Blue
Beads Beads Beads

Thus we find out much of what an in-charge does. He routes. He separates
into types or classes of thing or action.

This so far is a motionless org.

We have to have products. Let’s say its products are drilled beads, strung
beads, boxed beads.

We would get:

Red — Driller—Stringer— Polisher
White —  Driller—Stringer— Polisher
Blue —  Driller—Stringer— Polisher
Or we would get:
Red
white Driller—Stringer— Polisher

Blue

193
Or we would get:

In-Charge

Bead Bead Bead Bead
Separation Drilling Stringing Polishing

It is not particularly important which pattern of org board we use so long as
it handles the volume of beads.

If we only have one person in this “org,” he would still have to have some
idea of organization and a sort of org board.

If we have any volume to handle we have to add people. If we add them
without an org board we will also add confusion. The organization without an
org board will break down by overload and cross flows and currents. These in
conflict become confusion.

All a confusion is, is unpatterned flow. The particles collide, bounce off
each other and stay IN the area. Thus there is no product, as to have a product
something must flow OUT.

We can now note two things. We have some stable items. These are posts or
locations. And we have flow items. These are things undergoing change.

So an org’s positions change flowing particles.
Particles flow in sequence.
Things enter an org, get changed, flow out of an org.

An org with one type of item only (red beads) is less complex than one with
several types of items.

ican

Red Red Red Red
Clay Bead Bead Bead
Procurer Molder Boxer Shipper

Any activity has a sequence of actions. It has to have stable points which do
not flow in order to handle things which do flow.

It is not necessary to have a stable terminal do only one thing. But if so then
it also has a correct sequence of actions.

All this is true of an engine room or a lawyer’s office or any organization.

In an engine room fuel flows in and is changed to motion which flows out.
Somebody runs the machines. Somebody repairs the machines. It may all be done
by one person but as soon as volume goes up one has to plan out the actions,
classify them and put them on an org board which the people there know and
abide by or the place will not operate well.

This is done by dividing operation and repair into two actions, making two
activities on the same org board.

194
[Crit nner Engineer

Stores Repair Motormen
and Crew Watches
Fuel

The Chief keeps the flows going and the terminals performing their actions.

In a lawyer's office we get different actions as a flow.

Head of Firm

Ambulance Case Court
Contactor Preparation Appearance

would be a flow pattern, possibly with a different person (with a different skill)
on each point.

Or we could have a sort of motionless org board.

Head of Firm

Criminal Corporate Trust
Clients Clients Dept.

But if we did that we would have to put the motion in vertically so that flow

would occur.
Head of Firm

Criminal Corporate Trust
Dept. Dept. Dept.
| |
Contacts & Contacts & Contacts
Interviews Interviews |
Case Preparation Preparations Investment
| |
Court Services Vaults
Appearances

Org boards which only give terminals usually will not flow.

A typical army org board of yesteryear was:

Officers
Army
When they got into a lot more men they had to have a flow board.

Recruits Equipment Training Army = Operations

195
So one organizes by:
1. Surveying the types of particles.
2. Working out the changes desired for each to make a product.

3. Posting the terminals who will do the changing along the sequence of
changes.

The board also must include a recognition of the types in | which routes the
types to the terminals who change them and to a further routing out as products.

To be practical an org board must also provide for pulling in the materials.
disposing of the product and being paid for the cycle of action and its supervision.

A company has various actions.

It is essentially a collection of small org boards combined to operate together
as a large org board.

The basic principles you have to know to organize anything are contained in
this policy letter.

To plan out any action one has to be able to visualize its sequence of flows
and the changes that occur at each point. One has to be able to see where a
particle (paper, body, money) comes in and where it leaves.

One has to be able to spot any point it will halt and mend that part of the
flow or handle it.

A proper org board is a perpetual combination of flows which do not collide

with one another and which do enter and do experience the desired change and
which do leave as a product.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

196
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue I
Exec Dir Hat

HES Hat

HAS Hat

Executive Hat

Org Series 2

COPE AND ORGANIZE

(Originally issued as Flag Order 2549 on 8 Sept. 70)

It’s perfectly all right to cope. One always must.
But one MUST organize things while he copes.

The mounting overload and overwhelm in an area comes entirely from cope-
cope-cope without organizing also.

Example: You have to handle something for which there is no planned or-
ganization. Like a mob at a congress. You can cope. But if you don't take the
first available instant to grab three guys and give them specific duties right then
to mind doors and tickets, it all just gets worse and worse and the cope catches
up as overwhelm.

Any old org bd is better than no org bd at all.

A good org bd well grooved in, duties well apportioned, permits things to
smooth out and increase in volume without strain.

In a flood if you can channel the water, you can handle the flood. If you just
batter at water you drown.

ORGANIZATIONAL GENIUS IS COMPOSED ONLY OF ARRANGING
SEQUENCES OF ACTION AND DESIGNATING CHANNELS FOR TYPES
OF PARTICLES. THAT’S ALL IT IS.

Then you can handle flows and prevent stops.
So you must always organize as you cope.

National riots are just the inability of leaders to arrange sequences of action
and designate channels for types of particles.

One area which was never organized became just an anthill of do-less, use-
less motion.

If your in-basket is too high, you cope and handle it AND ORGANIZE
YOUR LINES for the future.

“T’m absolutely drowning... .”
worth a damn!”

is the same as saying “I can’t organize

197
ORG BD
Every exec has his own personal org bd. Really it’s at least 21 depts.
But you don’t have to go that fancy.

I had an org bd once that was 8 folders, each representing traffic from a
major org, reports placed in it latest on top, a communicator who did the placing,
a greeter who handled bodies and an inspector that was me. Just myself and one
other. But it was an org. With that “org bd” I handled all the Scientology in the
world at that time, lectured, researched and had ample time left over. It reduced
cope to a part-time job. Later 100 staff members (WW) replaced me as Exec Dir
and I moved off post. They were all very busy but they didn’t even know they
had an org bd they were on, no individual operated his own personal org bd.
Their cope and ignorance took the stats right on down. But they sure were busy
coping!

The antithesis (opposite) of an org bd is confusion. The amount of confusion
present doesn’t add up to production, even though it is totally exhausting. The
end product one wants is not exhaustion. The amount of energy expended does
not measure production. Production is solely the amount of completed cycles that
occur. The more they are planned in sequence and the better the different types
are channeled, the more production will occur.

So cope by all means but don’t forget to organize a little each time you get
a chance.

The end product of cope is drown.

The end product of organize is freedom.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

198
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue II
Exec Dir Hat
HES Hat
HAS Hat
URGENT

Org Series 3

HOW TO ORGANIZE AN ORG

Let us assume that you have an org to run (or any part thereof).
How would you organize it and get it to function?

1. You would count up and name the different vital actions necessary to
functioning.

2. You would count up the persons needed for each function and give them
the post names.

3. You would do a checksheet for each post to include its vital data.
4. You would collect the material of each checksheet into a pack.

5. You would recruit the minimal number to begin it, keeping in mind
finance and solving that.

6. You would show one of them how to check the others out to get them
trained.

7. You would then get the org running.

8. You would expand it by single hatting vital posts.

9. All the while you would cope with things as they came up.
10. You would add to checksheets and packs things learned while operating.
11. You would add posts as they were found needful.

12. You would never drop out the actions of recruiting, checksheets, packs
and training.

Naturally the org would have to have a function that was valuable and would
have to execute it or produce and be paid or it would not be viable (able to live).

All right. All that seems straightforward enough.

Now let’s see how it could go wrong.

199
Foremost would be a failure to function or produce and a failure to get paid
for it. This would cripple the activity and bring in inadequate operating funds,
curtailing facilities and pay and making it undermanned, hurting its image and
shutting off recruitment.

Recruiting to fill a new function could be incorrectly (destructively) done by
using the production area as the recruitment pool. Also each time a portion was
operating well, it could be used as a recruitment pool and emptied out and un-
mocked. This would destroy all training effort and injure the viability and re-
verse organization back to cope.

Or no recruitment could be done at all.
There could be no checksheets or packs.
There could be no training done even when checksheets and packs existed.

The checksheets or packs could be too short or unreal for the post. Or they
could be too long or relate to another post.

The head of the org could fail to check out the heads of portions.
The heads of portions could fail to get their juniors hatted and checked out.

The org staff could be unaware of their belonging to the org and be unaware
of its purpose and general products.

The problems as listed above could remain obscured and ethics could be
substituted as an effort to get up production.

There are ten basic points that could go out. These are (1) recruiting (2)
training (3) training on post (4) utilization (5) production of product (6) promo-
tion of product (7) sale of product (8) finance (9) justice (10) morale.

It is assumed that the activity is worthwhile and the potential production
valuable. Given that, the remaining ten points are the points where organization
breaks down as these areas are the most aberrated in the society.

The fundamental outnesses, however, would be failure to recruit, to have
checksheets and packs for each post, get training done on them and have new
people on post serve on it in-training.

Let us suppose the head of an org or division never checked any junior out
on anything.

Looking at standard functions, everyone would be posting and routing people
except Dept |, intended for that. Everyone would be handling comm except Dept 2,
intended for that. Everyone would be inspecting and handling stats except Dept 3.
And so on down the line. The place would be a dog’s breakfast of total cope.

All right, let us say one does have a dog’s breakfast instead of an org. How
would one straighten it out?

One would cope to maintain some semblance of viability.

200
One would throw together an org board and post it and drill people on it.
One would throw together hats and get them worn.

One would continue to cope but now also force others to help the coping and
cope themselves as semispecialists on their own posts.

Finally one would get checksheets and packs together for each post covering
all its actions.

One would then get these checksheets and their packs trained on for each
post fully.

Thereafter one would insist that executives made sure their juniors had
checksheets and packs as their hats.

And one would continue to recruit as by this time the org would be expand-
ing and it would become upset by undermanning and go down hill again.

One would watch the ten aberrated points as they go out very easily.

People gather up all sorts of weird solutions to running a disorganized org.
‘We need more experienced people”; “We can’t produce so should be subsi-
dized,” are two common ones.

When people on post do NOT have grooved in hats they do goofy things.
The goofiness is not confined just to their job functions. Lacking a purpose and
not conceiving the org purpose they can go utterly astray and do things that are
quite mad. Like tearing things up. Like breaking things. Like getting involved in
goofy relationships.

You can detect an org where posts are not grooved in by the number of
oddball things happening.

The way to put this sort of situation right is to start organizing as given in
this rundown.

Working on organization as you cope, it will eventually make it come out right.

When it sags just come back to this rundown and it will all straighten out again.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

201
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 22 SEPTEMBER 1970
Remimeo
Exec Hats
Personnel Hats
Ethics Hats

AN URGENT IMPORTANT AND STAR-RATE PL

Personnel Series 9
Org Series 4

HATS

HAT—A term used to describe the write-ups, checksheets and packs that
outline the purposes, know-how and duties of a post. It exists in folders and
packs and is trained in on the person on the post.

HAT TECHNOLOGY
“Hats” developed in 1950 for use in Dianetic orgs as a special technology.
The term and idea of ‘a hat” comes from conductors or locomotive engineers,
etc., each of whom wears a distinctive and different type of headgear. A “hat”
therefore designates particular status and duties in an organization.

A “hat” is a specialty. It handles or controls certain particles in various actions
and receives, changes and routes them.

A “hat” designates what terminal in the organization is represented and
what the terminal handles and what flows the terminal directs.

Every hat has a product.
The product can be represented as a statistic.

Any job or position in the world could have its own hat. The reason things do
not run well in a life, an org, a group, nation or the world is an absence of hats.

The reason why an org runs well when it does is hats.

Any protest of anyone against things not running right can be traced to lack
of hats.

Any slump an org goes through can be traced directly and at once to an
absence of one or more hats being worn.

HAT CONTENT
A hat must contain:

A. A purpose of the post.

202
Its relative position on the org bd.

A write-up of the post (done usually by people who have held it before
relief and when so done it has no further authority than advice).

A checksheet of all the policy letters, bulletins, advices, manuals, books
and drills applicable to the post. (As in a course checksheet.)

A full pack of the written materials or tapes of the checksheet plus any
manuals of equipment or books.

A copy of the org bd of the portion of the org to which the post belongs.
A flow chart showing what particles are received by the post and what
changes the post is expected to make in them and to where the post
routes them.

The product of the post.

The statistic of the post, the statistic of the section, the statistic of the
department and division to which the post belongs.

STAFF HAT

There is also a general staff hat.

This hat contains:

a.

b.

The overall purpose of the org, its aims, goals and products.

The privileges or rewards of a staff member such as auditing, training
on post, general training availability, pay, vacations or leave, etc.

The penalties involved in nonproduction or abuse of post privileges or
misuse of the post contracts.

The public relations responsibilities of a staff member.

The interpersonal relations amongst staff members including courtesy,
cleanliness, attitudes to seniors and juniors, office etiquette, etc.

The mest of posts generally, its papers, despatches, files, equipment.

The comm and transport system of the org.

GRADIENT SCALE OF HATS

A “gradient scale’ means “a gradual increasing degree of something.” A
non-gradient scale would be telling someone to enter a skyscraper by a 32nd
story window.

Thus there is a gradient scale of organizing.

A key to this is found in The Problems of Work’s theory of confusion and the
stable datum.

203
One in actual practice has to cope while organizing.

COPE means to handle whatever comes up. In the dictionary it means “to
deal successfully with a difficult situation.” We use it to mean “‘to handle any old
way whatever comes up, to handle it successfully and somehow.”

IF YOU REMAIN IN COPE, THE DEMAND TO COPE INCREASES.

In that you have the key to “exhausted executives” or staff members. You
have why the president of the US ages about 20 years in one term of office as
you can see by comparing dated photographs of past presidents. He is totally on
cope. His government has an org board that looks like a pile of jackstraws. He has
no hat. His staff have no hats. His government departments have no hat. The
technologies of economics, law, business, politics, welfare, warfare, diplomacy,
have been lost or neglected (they do exist to some extent).

The guy is on total cope. And the post has been on total cope since it was
created as an afterthought by the Constitutional Congress that began the post in
the 18th century. Even what it says in US civics textbooks is not found in practice.

So “difficult situations” are the order of the day and are handled by special
actions and appointments.

The people who should handle them haven’t got real hats.

This is all catching up with the country at this writing to such a degree that
the citizen cannot benefit from a stable society or social order. The country looks
more like a war of insurgency.

In other words departures from hats has led into total cope and it is steadily
worsening.

Any organization put in by one political party is knocked out by the next
incumbent, and who could totally organize a country in 4 years? (The term of a
president.)

Yet it is hanging together some way and some way meeting increasing de-
mands and pressures.

I have stated this in a large example so that it can be seen in a smaller unit.
To handle this one would first have to want to straighten it out and then
assemble the tech of admin to straighten it out. And then one would have to

begin on a gradient scale of org bd and hats.

A cope sort of hat would be tossed-off orders to some other people on staff
who have some title of some sort.

Along with this would be a posted org bd that has little to do with duties
actually performed and used by a staff that doesn’t know what it is.

One begins to move out of cope (as given in other series) by putting an org

board together that labels posts and duties and getting people on them to handle
the types of particles (bodies, mailings) of the org.

204
The next action would be brief write-ups of the posts and their duties and
checking people out on them.

Actually if you only got to the middle of the last paragraph with an org the
executives would remain in cope. So much know-how would be missing in the
org’s staff that every rough bit would shoot up to the executive for special han-
dling. And that is cope.

Hats only in this far is not good enough as it still takes a genius to run the place.
The next gradient scale is to get the hat to contain:

i. The post write-up itself

li. The theory and practical necessary to run it.

This is done by a preparation of checksheets of data and a pack matching it
for key posts.

Naturally the org bd now has to become more real and staff has to be
checked out on it.

Then hats as post checksheets and packs are extended to the rest of the staff.
The mechanisms of training have to exist by this time.

Seniors have to be made responsible that every junior below them has a hat
consisting of write-up, checksheet and pack.

Meanwhile one continues to cope.

Gradually, gradually staff begin to know (through checkouts) their hats.
New staff coming on are grooved in better.

Cope begins to diminish and the organization tends to smooth out.
Here and there competent handlings begin to show up brightly.

Now we find a new situation. With everyone throwing together checksheets
and packs for staffs we find nonstandard checksheets. Some messenger has to do
the full checksheet of the HCO Division pages and pages long. The HCO Sec has
a checksheet with just 10 items on it.

So a central authority has to standardize post checksheets and survey and put
in overlooked bits of data.

But that is way up the line. The org long since has become smooth and
prosperous.

So that is the gradient scale of getting in hats.
EXPERTS
Here and there you find an area of special expertise in an org where the

expertise is so expert in itself that it obscures the fact that the person does not
also have a full post hat.

205
A lawyer would be a case in point. It takes so long to learn law in some law
school that an org executive can overlook the fact that the post hat is missing.
Org policy on legal matters and staff hat remain unknown to this legal post AND
JAM IT UTTERLY. This came to light when a whole series of cases was being
neglected because the legal staff member, an excellent lawyer, did not know how
to make out a purchase order or that one could or should. Investigation found no
post or staff hat. Only a legal degree.

Orgs continually do this with auditors. They are technical experts in audit-
ing. So they get assigned to posts in the HGC WITH NO HAT. Backlogs occur,
things goof up. Tech fails. All because it is overlooked that they are PART OF
AN ORG and need staff and post hats and need to be trained on them.

Worse than that, a highly classed auditor is often put on an admin post with-
out hat or training for it.

You would not take an admin-trained person and without further training tell
him to audit. So why take an auditor and tell him to handle an admin division?

Without his post write-up, checksheet and pack FOR THE POST and with-
out training on it, the person just isn’t qualified for it no matter what other line
he is expert in.

It is great to have an expert who has been specially trained in some profession.
But lawyer, engineer or public relations, he must have his hat for the org post and be

trained on it or he will goof! Yet one won’t suspect why that area is goofing because
“he’s a Class VI isn’t he?”

UTILIZATION
Personnel can recruit madly, answering every frantic demand for personnel
and yet HAVE THEM ALL WASTED for lack of full hats and full training on
those hats.

An investigation of blows (desertions) from orgs shows that lack of a
grooved-in hat was at the bottom of it.

People come on a job. It is at once a great mystery or an assumption of total
know—one or the other.

Either one continued leads them into a state of liability to the org.

People who don’t know what they are doing and people who don’t but think
they do are both NONUTILIZED PERSONNEL.

Pay and prosperity for the rest of the staff will go down unless this is remedied.

The whole org can sag and even vanish under these conditions.

So Personnel has a vested interest in hats being complete and staff trained on
them. For Personnel people cannot possibly cope with ‘tno pay so can’t hire

anyone” and “no people so can’t produce.”

The answer is H-A-T-S.

206
And a hat is a write-up, a checksheet and a pack.

And the staff member trained on them.

ETHICS
When a person has no hat he lacks purpose and value.
When he has no purpose and value he not only goofs, he will commit crimes.

It is apparently easier to hit with ethics than to program and give someone a
full hat and get him trained on it.

Police action is not a substitute for having purpose and value.

This is so fundamental that one can even trace the unrest of a nation to lack
of purpose and value. A huge welfare program guarantees crime and revolt be-
cause it gives handouts, not hats.

Even a field Scientologist should have a hat.

By doing only this over the world we would own the planet, as in an expand-
ing population, individual purpose and value are the most vital and wanted com-
modities.

If there are no real hats there will soon be no money of any value and no
bread!

SUMMARY

ANY HAT IS BETTER THAN NO HAT according to the way a thetan
seems to think.

But be that as it may, the downfall of any org can be traced directly and
instantly to no recruiting or no org board, no hats or unreal hats or no training
on hats.

The sag of an org can be traced directly to lack of hats and lack of training
on hats.

The overload of any post can be traced directly to lack of an org bd and lack
of hats and no training on hats.

The way out is to organize the org board and hats while you cope.

If you do not, your cope will become an overwhelm. If you do, your burden
will lighten and your prosperity increase.

It took 13 months of hard work and 20 years of org experience to learn that,
given a product, lack of HATS was the WHY of departures from the ideal scene
and that working toward providing full complete HATS was the way to get back
toward the ideal scene.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

207
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 26 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue IT]
Executive Hats

Org Series 5

ORG BOARD CUTATIVES
The most serious blunder in re-doing org boards is losing past functions
off them.

“‘Cutative” is an invented word to mean the impulse to shorten or leave out
or the thing left out.

THE RULE IS: ANY MAJOR FUNCTION, ACTION OR POST LEFT OFF
AN ORG BOARD WILL WRAP ITSELF AROUND THE IN-CHARGE LIKE
A HIDDEN MENACE.

As the function is not expressed it is not recognized. But it forces itself up-
ward and can swamp an activity if not done.

Thus we get the laws:
1. Activity functions must all be expressed on the org board.

2. All functions below a personnel on an org bd are the responsibility of
that personnel, no matter what size the staff may be.

3. Functions omitted will act as invisible overloads.

EVOLUTION OF ORG BDs

Usually the first org board ever done for an activity is a dream-up. It is
seldom real but better than no org bd at all.

Experience then refines it.

Some functions on it are not related to it, are unreal.

Some functions not on it rise up to haunt and overload the in-charge.

Actions done by an executive that are not on the org board in departments
get posted like small flags opposite the executive’s name. (Like legal, VIP greet-
ing, etc.)

After a while these little flags are too many.

208
A reorganization occurs and the flags are put down into departmental func-
tions. This gets them off the executive’s neck and gets them manned up.

So far so good. Now what happens is a catastrophe. A new executive who has no
experience with this org bd DREAMS UP A NEW ONE. This is out of sequence
in evolution. He is treating the place as though it had NO org bd simply because
he doesn’t know the existing board.

This gives us the cutative. He drops functions off the board. These now wrap
around his neck. The place stalls.

YOU HAVE TO KEEP EVERYTHING ON THE ORG BD THAT WAS
EVER ON THE ORG BD EVEN IF IT WAS 3000 YEARS.

SALVAGE
It often occurs that one has to do a full, complete salvage of an org bd.

There is absolutely no reason except the org bd writer’s laziness not to put
everything on an org bd!

There is a rule about posting an org bd. You don’t post a name for every
post. That is folly. You post by workload.

All the functions below a person are handled by that person. If they are too
much you put in a new name and person on a heavy load function.

So why do a cutative? It means no more people. It just means more space
and tape. What’s saved but elbow grease? What’s lost? The whole org can be lost
and become nonviable.

Example: SH original board had 10 major divisions on it. They were just
functions really. They were the 10 sources of income before SH trained or proc-
essed anyone. Some years ago I tore the place apart looking for that old org bd.
It was evidently thrown away. Today SH does not have but one of those income
functions! Nine have been lost! It added training and processing, it lost 9 func-
tions capable of supporting it. They should be looked up in the 1959-60 accounts
records, the old invoices analyzed and gotten back and put on the WW org bd
and manned. This is regardless of what is already on the org bd.

Other functions lost off that and the SH org bds should be posted back on
them and at least held from above or double or triple-hatted.

Example: DC which had the original 6 dept org bd should recover those
posts and put them on the 9 div org bd so early policy would make sense.

Example: London should recover its earliest org bds and put their posts and
functions on its current org bd.

There comes a time when early org bds have to be salvaged and reposted on
existing org bds.

BECAUSE THOSE FUNCTIONS ARE STILL THERE AND MOST OF
THEM GONE INVISIBLE.

Example: A Division 2 org bd asked to be redone threw away 50 percent of
its functions and posts, was dreamed up brand-new off a division already caved

209
in by loss of performance. The excuse was “other activities now do these.”’ Pub-
lished, this org bd would have driven its executive mad with omitted duties that
would come to him as invisible overloads.

The “We don’t do that now” is like what once happened to tech. One could
say, ““Maybe you think you don’t do it now but the function is still there hidden.
It was found once. Now you've lost it again.”

OLD EMPIRES
The Egyptian, Greek and Roman Empires still try to operate! I’ve checked
it. The late British Empire may be gone on the British org bd but it will still
function without expression until it kicks England’s head in. The British public
shovels money out by the scoopful to an empire that doesn’t exist!
Trying to kill an org takes years and years and years and it still tries to survive.

When one takes responsibility for a function or area it still tends to persist.

It is an odd phenomenon. The third dynamic track is that way. Changes later
on the track (short of auditing individuals) do not change earlier circumstances.

A thetan’s intentions get very pale perhaps but a thetan never really gives up.
All this expresses itself on the subject of org bds.

One can also willfully disregard an existing board, dream up a new board
that does not express the functions and get into real trouble.

A NEW LOOK

Examining this subject of org bds in the light of very current experience
with asking people to redo them, these facts have emerged.

It gives us a new look.

The next full Scn org bd issue you see will have on it all functions of which
we have any trace and the 9 division board we are using.

The new board will have 9 divisions. It will also include all past titles and
functions in addition to all current titles and functions with the past titles in
parentheses.

Many org bds of other activities have never become expressed at all and have
left a tangled history. The US still hangs flags around the Office of the President
and one hears “The Executive Branch is usurping the power of Congress.” Con-
gress once had all those functions but didn’t put them on its org bd. They still do
them but lost the titles to the president. Thus an appointee despotism rises in
place of a democracy. It all goes back to a lost congressional org bd.

210
It is necessary for a people or a staff to:
a. Have an org bd,

b. Know the org bd,

c. Have the org bd express the total functions and duties that have ever
been held by any post even including the flags of yesteryear duly dated.

Don’t cut functions off an org bd. If they have become known they have
been found. Why lose them?

One can rearrange flow patterns.
One cannot abandon living functions on an org bd.

It’s only the unknowns on an org bd that get anyone overloaded, confused or
in trouble.

So why not keep it visible?

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

211
Remimeo
Cashiers
Div 3s

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 27 SEPTEMBER 1970
Issue I

Pub Div Hats

Div 2 Hats

FSMs
Missions

Org Series 6

CUTATIVE PRICES

HCO PL of 27 Apr. 65 I], ORGANIZATIONAL PRICE ENGRAM, is fully
valid and must be followed. It explains why price cuts damage orgs.

Price cuts are forbidden under any guise.

1.

10.

PROCESSING MAY NEVER BE GIVEN AWAY BY AN ORG.

Processing is too expensive to deliver.

. BOOKS MAY NEVER BE GIVEN AWAY BY AN ORG OR BY PUBS

ORG.

They are too expensive to manufacture.

. FSM COMMISSIONS MAY NEVER BE PAID ON DISCOUNTED OR

CUT-RATE ITEMS.

If an FSM can’t sell for full value he does not rate any commission.

. SCHOLARSHIPS FOR COURSES ARE LIMITED TO INTERNSHIPS,

HSDC AND ACADEMY LEVELS.

. COURSE SCHOLARSHIPS ONLY MAY BE OFFERED FSM ON CON-

TEST AWARDS.

. SCHOLARSHIPS ARE ONLY AVAILABLE TO WORKING FSMs OF

PROVEN SELECTEE SUCCESSES.

. ALL SCHOLARSHIPS AND AWARDS OUTSTANDING TERMINATE

IF NOT TAKEN BEFORE | JANUARY 1971.

. FSM COMMISSIONS ARE PAID ONLY ON THE ARRIVAL OF A

STUDENT OR PC, NOT ON RECEIPT OF THE FEE.

Advance payments are sometimes refunded.

. ONLY FULLY CONTRACTED STAFF IS AWARDED FREE SERVICE,

AND THIS IS DONE BY INVOICE AND LEGAL NOTE WHICH
BECOMES DUE AND PAYABLE IF THE CONTRACT IS BROKEN.

FSM BONUS AWARDS TO ORGS MAY ONLY BE DELIVERED TO
CONTRACTED STAFF MEMBERS OF THAT ORG.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

212
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF | OCTOBER 1970

Remimeo
HC Checksheet

Org Series 7

HATS AND COUNTER-EFFORT

When you are trying to get somebody to do something he should do, you are
in effect trying to get him to wear his hat.

In trying to get things done, you often feel you are running into “counter-
effort.” (Contrary action or effort to your action or effort.)

The most usual counter-effort is NOT willfulness or mutiny or out-ethics.
Most people consider these are the reasons they get opposition to worthwhile
actions.

The most usual counter-effort is lack of a hat, defining a hat as a write-up,
checksheet and pack on which the person is trained.

It looks like willful stupidity, waywardness, laziness, mutiny, antagonism or
what have you and can amount to any or all of these.

Whatever the reason for it may be, it must include lack of a hat.
The variations are enormous, almost infinite.

Example: Mr. A is trying to get Mrs. A to be a good wife. Mrs. A is in
outright mutiny. Now, it could be that Mr. A does not have or know his husband
hat or Mrs. A has no wife hat or the neighbors or friends don’t have neighbor or
friend hats or Mr. B has no social hat and is trying to estrange Mrs. A or he has
no husband’s hat of his own; but whatever it is, it is a matter of hats. SOME-
BODY (or all of them) in this is not wearing their hat.

I had someone in marital trouble look at me thoughtfully once and say, “I
don’t have any idea what are the rights or duties OF a wife.”

Example: A Course Supervisor having trouble getting a student to study. He
pleaded and argued and wore himself out.

He never realized this student DID NOT HAVE A STUDENT HAT. He
could have saved all his energy spent in arguing and applied it to making up a
student hat and getting it assembled and studied and would have gotten some-
where.

ORG BD

So we draw up an org board for an activity for several people.

213
It is all correct as to function and flows.

We put the names of the several people on it where they seem to be fitted.
The activity doesn’t go.

So we explain and drill the org board on the people.

It comes up to a flubby sort of cope.

The missing point now is HATS. Each one has to have and know his own hat
and something about the hats of others.

Things will promptly get much better! The activity and the interpersonal
relations and the lives of these people are greatly improved.

Personally they are running into much less cross flow and confusion. So they
have a happier time, less effort and more production.

A badly organized, badly hatted, badly trained group is at each other’s
throats continually. To get anything done at all they have to operate at the level of
correction instead of production.

Any ripple of emergency in such a group operates as a major impact.

PROGRAMS

There is still a missing element when one has org boarded and hatted and
specialist-trained an activity. This is PROGRAMS.

The sequence of flows and the changes or actions at each point plotted
against time are in fact the major sequences and programs of a group.

MANAGEMENT SUCCESS

Given a desired product, a fully successful management can only be founded
on the actions inherent in:

1. A good org board,

2. Hats as write-ups, checksheets and packs,

3. Hats trained-in,

4. Sequences and programs known and followed.

IT IS FAR, FAR EASIER TO WORK ON AND ACCOMPLISH THOSE
FOUR THINGS THAN IT IS TO COPE AGAINST THE COUNTER-EFFORT
GENERATED WITHOUT THEM.

Naturally, while getting this done, anyone has to cope to keep things going.

SINGLE-HANDING

““Single-handing” means to handle things by yourself.

214
You can single-hand when you are all alone or you can single-hand in a
large group that is supposed to be working or helping.

When only one man, senior or junior, is doing all the controlling and work
of an activity, he is said to be “single-handing.”

The term derives from the sea (like so many English words). Single means
“one only” and “hand” means a sailor. “Handing” is the verb form of “single-
hand.”

No other activity expresses so well the idea of ‘“‘one man working” or “one
man controlling.”

It is of course derogatory to others who are around and not working.

The phenomenon comes about by having non-org-boarded, unhatted and un-
trained people.

Now the oddity of it is that it can occur (a) when there are other people who

are also supposed to be working, (b) when there is an org board, (c) when there
are hats and (d) when programs exist.

29 66

This of course looks like “bad morale,” “apathy,” even “mutiny.”
The missing elements usually are:

a. The other people don’t know the purpose of the activity or what’s really
going on.

b. The org bd is unknown to them even when it exists.
c. The hats are not checksheets and packs and have not been trained in.

d. The sequences or programs that should occur are not drilled in, and if
they were the no-hat situation would wreck them.

The point is even more amazing when a group with a purpose and an excel-
lent potential product WILL BE POOR AND WILL FAIL if org bd, hats and
sequences and programs are not fully known and drilled.

Groups are like that.

This is why man and his activities succeed only in the presence of huge
affluences or extraordinary personal leadership.

Lacking org bds, hats, training, programs that he knows and can do, man
flounders.

UNHATTED LEADERS

Leaders who are not org-boarded, hatted and trained and programed can
make a fantastic mess out of a formerly well-organized group.

215
It takes some doing. But no one can knock the known org board apart faster
than a senior. No one can knock off hats easier than someone in authority who
does not himself know they exist.

Nero and his ilk destroyed the whole Roman Empire. That civilization was
about as well org boarded and hatted as any civilization on the planet in recent
millennia. Nero thought he was a lute player and composer and charioteer. These
were the only hats he ever wore aside from that of murderer.

A few emperors like him and that was that.

The Christians had an org board, member hats and staff hats, post hats of a
sort and constant training. And that was the end of the Roman Empire and the
beginning of the Holy Roman Empire.

Way up in Pope Alexander the Sixth’s time (the days of Lucretia Borgia)
when bishoprics were for sale and the member hats were forgotten, the Holy
Roman Empire failed.

So there is plenty of history and example, even though the full tech was not
even developed. You can see the dim counterparts of org boards and hats weav-
ing their way through all man’s yesterdays.

The history of the world is not written by wars and violence. It is written against
an unseen background of beneficial products, org board, hats and programs.

The fantastic administrative skill of Arthur Wellesley (the Duke of Welling-
ton) and the rigid org bd of Nicholas of Russia defeated Napoleon whose only
skills were military genius and personal leadership and luck.

So when the head of something does not know about org bds and hats and
programs, he can single-hand things perhaps into temporary power but will wear
himself out with cope and soon decline.

One can’t just run things. One has to put something there and the something
is a desirable product, and org bd hats and programs and see they are grooved in

properly.

And looking over history, the most valuable product of an executive is hold-
ing the form of his org and providing his staff members with hats and programs
well grooved in.

It takes so much more time and effort to build up an org in terms of org bd
and hats and get it to hold its form that one might not at once see its benefit.
Trying to get a result without also building an organization inevitably winds up
in single-handing, coping, overwhelm and eventual defeat.

The right answer is single-hand while you train up your people.

For one will wind up single-handing any post he has not org boarded and
hatted and programed.

And that is true of even a junior member of a staff. If HE doesn’t hammer
away to get in org bds and hats and sequences and programs, HE will wind up

216
single-handing all his section—while they stand around making life miserable
with inefficiency, goofs and flubs and obvious counter-effort.

It isn’t labor against management or the people against government. One or
the other or both aren’t on org bds and aren’t wearing their hats.

And in an interdependent society or a complex activity the final result of no
org bd, no hats, no programs known, is chaos. And very unpleasant chaos as well.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

217
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 8 OCTOBER 1970

Remimeo
Executives

Org Series 8

ORGANIZING AND PRODUCT

Disorganization gives a poor product.

Organization (providing tech exists to make the product) will produce a good
product.

If a product is poor or spotty one must:
a. Organize
b. Make the tech available and known.

You can literally have mobs of people working and excellent production tech
and get a horrible product.

The missing ingredient is organization.

Organization consists of a real and functional org board, hats consisting of
checksheets, packs and manuals and training of this material.

The most used org board is the “hey you! org board.” In other words just tag
anyone to do anything.

This guarantees bad production and a lousy product.
One can have-an org board that isn’t real and get a “they you! org board.”

Or one can have a good org board that isn’t known and get a “‘hey you! org
board” in actual practice.

A whole org can be org boarded and hatted and trained and yet shatter when
an untrained senior turns it into a “hey you! org board.” This is easily the com-
monest cause of org collapse.

LOSING AN ORG BOARD

When an org board leaves out known vital functions these tend to wrap
around the neck of the in-charge as unknown items of irritation.

The commonest fault in re-drawing an org board is throwing the old one
away and without looking at or getting a full inspection of the actual functions
being done, dreaming up a brand new board. This produces a delusory situation.
It is in fact a disassociation of the real work and the org board delusion.

218
MINIMUM FUNCTION
A post tends to dwindle down to the “irreducible minimum function.”

A mail clerk will distribute mail as that is visible to others. Logging it is less
visible. Properly sorting it is less visible.

If ‘receiving, logging, sorting and distributing” are left off the org board
and “mail distribution” is all that is left on it, the other functions tend to vanish
and the post slides to “irreducible minimum” of just grabbing and slinging out
mail.

A galley org board can be deficient and carry only “food,” or “cook”;
you'll get “food” and that’s all. It will possibly be very lousy food as the org
board is down to an irreducible minimum. Says “food” so they just sling out
food any old way of any old kind. Bad product. The answer is to organize it.
What are the steps in sequence that it takes to get good food served and the
place cleaned up? If they are all on the org board as functions you have the
SEQUENCE of actions expressed as functions which can be posted and delegated
as duties.

OUT SEQUENCE and OMITTED HATS are the commonest fault in pro-
grams and org boards. (See Data Series.)

One person may have 35 separate hats.

If so, he needs 35 hat folders, checksheets ard packs and 35 baskets or com-
partments for the flows.

Further, the hats must be in sequence of flow where they relate to one type
of particle.

Thirty-five hats is large but many an executive unknowingly wears more.
And the ones he doesn’t see are his areas of upset.

The smaller the number of people in an activity, the more hats each has.

One girl holding down 7 branches of an office finally got untangled just by
having seven baskets, one for each branch, and working a stated time on each one
each day. She sorted the inflow into the baskets by branches and then did them in
rotation. That made an org board of baskets. She suddenly got production where
she had had just despair and chaos.

SUMMARY

To improve an existing product, ORGANIZE.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

219
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 28 OCTOBER 1970

Remimeo

Org Series 9

ORGANIZING AND HATS

“Org bd” is actually an abbreviation not for an organization (noun) board
but an organizing (verb) board.

The org bd shows the pattern of organizing to obtain a product.

A board then is a flow chart of consecutive products brought about by ter-
minals in series.

We see these terminals as “posts” or positions.
Each one of these is a hat.

There is a flow along these hats.

The result of the whole board is a product.

The product of each hat on the board adds up to the total product.

WORKING IT OUT

When asked to work out an org bd (or when the board there is doesn’t work),
one might think the task very difficult.

In studying this subject so as to be able to communicate it, I made several
small breakthroughs in the subject itself.

Several questions on this can be very easily answered now.
Does an org bd have any value?
Yes. Without an org bd there is no group product, there is only a mob.

Yes. When there is no org bd there is much greater effort involved in getting
anything done.

Yes. The waste of people involved in no org bd and the loss of product
justify any amount of effort to work out, make known and use a proper org bd.

Man instinctively uses an org bd and protests the lack of one. The rawest

recruit walking aboard a ship assumes the existence of an org bd, if not a posted
one, at least a known one. He assumes there will be somebody in charge and that

220
different activities will be under different people. When there is no known org bd
he protests. He also feels insecure as he doesn’t know where he fits into this
organization.

Almost all revolts are manned by people who have been excluded out and are
not on the country’s org bd. This is so true that the ridiculous circumstance recently
occurred in the US. The president found he had “professional relief receivers.” Cer-
tain people had assumed the status of “government dependent” and were giving this
as their profession. It was of course a post of sorts. And because it wasn’t admitted
as a post by the government, there were some riots.

The effort to belong or to be part of is expressed by an org bd. A person
with no post is quite miserable. A person with an unreal post feels like a fraud or
a mistake.

Morale then is also considerably affected by the quality of an org bd or its
absence.

The overall test for the group, however, is its viability. Viability depends on
having an acceptable product. Groups which do not have an acceptable product
are not likely to survive.

The volume and acceptability of a product depends in no small measure on a
workable known org bd. This is true even of an individual product.

An individual or small group, to get anywhere at all, requires a very exact
org bd. The oddity is that the smaller the group the more vital the org bd. Yet
individuals and small groups are the least likely to have one. Large groups dis-
integrate in the absence of an org bd and go nonviable in the presence of a poor
one.

The quality of a product, usually blamed on individual skill only, depends to
an enormous extent upon the org board. For example, one disorganized mob that
was trying to make a certain product was worked to death, harassed, angry at
one another and had a wholly unacceptable product at about twice the usual cost;
when organized to the degree of a third, still without proper schedules, still
largely untrained, they began to turn out an acceptable product at about half the
effort—so even some organization worked.

The product volume and quality depends utterly and totally upon the org
board and hats and their use. You can train individuals endlessly but unless they
are operating on a workable org bd they will still have a poor or small volume
product.

The traditional reliance of British intelligence on star agents instead of or-
ganization cost them (along with misused PR) their empire.

Lack of a known and real org bd can spell failure. And lack of knowledge of
the subject of organization has to be substituted for by pure genius at every point.

Thus to make anything at all, to improve any product, sustain morale and
distribute work equitably and make it count, one has to have a real and a known
org bd.

So how do you make one?

221
HATS
An org bd is made up of hats.
The definition of a hat is the “beingness and doingness that attains a product.”
Let us take a train:

The engineer wearing his engineer hat has the title of engineer. That’s the
beingness.

He accepts orders, watches signals and general conditions, operates levers
and valves to regulate the operation of his engine and to start, change and stop.
That’s the doingness.

He safely and on schedule moves the train passengers and/or freight from
one location to another. A moved train and load is the product.

So how do we find out there is a hat called engineer?
As people are continually accepting or viewing already existing posts, when
you ask them to dream up an org bd they at first may not realize that you are

asking them to invent the correct posts.

They don’t have to invent “engineer.” Everybody knows ‘‘an engineer runs
a train.”

So if you didn’t know this? You’d have to figure it out.

One would do it this way. One would have to think along these lines:

The idea comes about because of a concept that people and goods have to be
moved over distances on land. Or that a new area building up has to have trans-

port of people and goods from and to it.

Ah. This will be viable in an economic framework because people will pay
to be moved and pay for their goods to be moved.

Trains do this.
So let’s use trains.

Arranging finance (or by prepayment) and obtaining a franchise for a right
of way, track is laid, rolling stock and stations and roundhouses are built.

Now it emerges that somebody has to drive the train. So somebody had better
be hired to drive the train.

So there comes into view the post of engineer.

How do we know this? Because we have to have a product of moved people
and goods. That was what we were trying to do in the first place.

Therefore, the engineer hat.

222
So supposing now we did not have any org bd at all.

The engineer hat would be the only hat. So he collects fares, runs stations,
fixes his engine, buys fuel, loads the cars, sells stock. .

Wait a minute. If the engineer did all that the following would happen:

1. He would be exhausted.

2. His temper would be bad.

3. He would have machinery breakdowns.

4. He might have wrecks.

5. The railroad property otherwise unhandled would disintegrate.

6. He would have a low volume of product.

7. His product would be uneven and bad as he could maintain no schedule.

8. There would shortly be no railroad.

Now let’s go wog and “solve”’ this.

Let’s appoint a person for each station and say “There we are!”

Well, it would still be a mess.

So let’s hire more engineers and more station agents and more engineers and
more station agents . . . and wind up with a confused mess, a huge payroll and a
lousy product. That’s how governments do it. And it is notable that current gov-
ernments have no product but disaster.

No, we have to solve this in quite another way.

We do not get anywhere and we will not get a sensible org bd and nothing
will work or be viable unless WE COUNT THE PRODUCTS CORRECTLY
AND DEVELOP HATS TO ATTAIN THEM.

When we have done this we can arrange the hats on an org bd so there is a
flow and command channels and communication channels and we’ve got an org bd.

You cannot work out an org bd until you have counted products!

As volume increases you estimate the products before the final product and
hat those.

Quality of final product depends on a real org bd and hats, both complete,
real and trained-in and the functions DONE.

Let us see now how you break down a final product into the products which,
put together, comprise it.

223
We have the final product of a railroad—viably moved loads. How many
lesser products go into the big product?

There is a matter of machinery here. Any machine has two products: (a) the
machine itself in good operating condition, (b) the product of the machine. A repair-
man and machine shop man and a roundhouse keeper each has a product under (a).
That is just for the machine, the engine.

Under (b) we have what the machine itself produces (hauled trains in the case
of an engine).

Here we have then two major products—and these break down into lesser
products, earlier in sequence to the final product.

There is even an earlier product to these—bought engines. And an earlier
product to that—finance for equipment.

As for the load itself, a delivered load, accepted by a consignee at the end,
as you back up the sequence you will find a product—stored freight. And before
that—unloaded freight. And before that—moved freight. And before that—loaded
freight. And before that—freight assembled for shipment. And before that—
freight contracts procured. And before that—advertising placed in public view.
And before that—surveys of public freight requirement. And before that—survey
for activities requiring freight service.

Each one of these products is a hat.

Surveying this again we see there’s no charges or money involved so no eco-
nomic viability. Thus we have a product, money made. This has earlier hats of
course. The bewilderment of some people (and a lot of executives) who gape at a
no-dough situation is laughable. They aren’t product-minded. They think money
falls into a company’s lap or out of a TV set. They can’t think the product
sequence necessary to obtain money. So they go broke and starve. There are
always a lot of prior products to the product MONEY. Fixated people just fixate
on money itself, have no product sequence and so go broke or are poor.

Someone has to have a desirable product that is sold for more than it cost to
produce and have to sell it and deliver it to have money. Money even makes
money. And even a pool of money has to have a product sequence or it vanishes.

Even in socialism or communism the how does it support itself question
must be understood, answered, its product sequence identified, org boarded and
hatted. In such a moneyless society the org boarding has to be much tighter as
money adds flexibility and lack of it as a working factor makes problems that are
hard to solve.

ORGANIZING
In order to organize something one only has to
1. Establish what is the final product.

2. Work backwards in sequence to establish the earlier products necessary
to make each next product and which all in a row add up to the final
product.

224
. Post it in terms of vertical greater and greater completeness of product

to get command channels.

. Adjust it for flows.
. Assign its comm sequence.

. Work out the doing resulting in each product. Write these as functions

and actions with all skills included.

. Name these as posts.

. Post it.

. Drill it to get it known.

. Assemble and issue the hats.
. Get these known.

. Get the functions done so that the products occur.

This is what is called “organizing.”

As a comment, because railroads didn’t fully organize, their viability de-

cayed and they ceased to be so used.

Railroads think it’s the government or airplane rivalry or many other things.

It isn’t. They had too many missing hats, were actually too disorganized to keep
pace with the society’s demands, ceased to fully deliver and declined. In fact
there has never been a greater need of railroads than today. Yet, disorganized,
badly org boarded and hatted, they do not furnish the service they should and so
are opposed, government regulated, union hammered and caved in.

To have a quality product, organize!

To raise morale, organize!

To survive, organize!

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

225
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 OCTOBER 1970

Remimeo
Exec Hats

Org Series 10

THE ANALYSIS OF ORGANIZATION BY PRODUCT

The different products involved in production are:

1. Establishing something that produces. (Product 1)

2. Operating that which produces in order to obtain a product. (Product 2)

3. Repairing or correcting that which produces. (Product 3)

4. Repairing or correcting that which is produced. (Product 4)

Example: A typewriter is manufactured and located on a desk. This is estab-
lishing something that produces as in (1). A typist operates or runs the typewriter
which thus produces typed sheets, stencils, etc., which are the product produced.
This satisfies (2) above. The typewriter from various causes eventually requires
repair in order to continue to produce. This satisfies (3). The correction of things
typed would satisfy (4).

These are the four basic PRODUCTS involved in production.

Thus there are really four basic products necessary to a production activity.
These are:

1. The established machine.
2. The machine’s product.
3. The corrected machine.
4. The corrected product.

That makes a minimum of four products for any production cycle.

Three major factors govern every product. These are:

A. Quantity.
B. Quality.
C. Viability.

Quantity would be an acceptable, expected or useful volume.

226
Quality would be the degree of perfection of a product.
Viability would be the longevity, usefulness and desirability of the product.

As each product in the four listed above has three factors in each product,
there are then twelve major points (4 x 3) regulating production.

Product 1—Establishing the typewriter contains:

i. The quantity of typewriters established.

ii. The quality of the typewriters established.

iii. The viability of the typewriters established.

Product 2—The product of the typewriter (typed things) also has three:
iv. The quantity of the typed things.

v. The quality of the typed things.

vi. The viability of the typed things.

Product 3—The repair of the typewriter itself also has three factors:
vii. The quantity (amount) of the repair.

vill. The quality of the repair.

ix. The viability of the repair.

Product 4—The correction of the thing produced.

x. The quantity (amount) of the corrected product.

xi. The quality of the corrected product.

xii. The viability of the corrected product.

Thus to get a product, “typed things,” there are actually twelve separate factors.

This applies to all machinery. For instance, there is the generator that pro-
duces and there is the thing (electricity) produced by the generator. There is the
repaired generator. And there is the corrected electricity (such as reducing its
voltage or converting it).

Now if you did not know that you were handling twelve factors in producing
electricity, the tendency would be to “just run the generator” and ignore the
actual factors governing production.

The results of this would be total operation only. The generator would soon
go to pieces. The electricity furnished would vary all over the place and blow out
other equipment. There would be no funds to repair or replace the generator when
it broke down. By paying little attention to products (as the wog world often
does) or by shifting their importances—giving total importance to running it—
there would soon be no viability at all. The end result would be two wrong
products—scrap metal that was once a generator and no electricity.

227
Now, surprise, surprise! An organization composed of people is influenced
by these same things!

Org Product 1 is putting it there.

Org Product 2 is what the org produces.

Org Product 3 is the repair of the org.

Org Product 4 is the correction of the org’s product.

If we do not know these products and factors exist, continual mistakes can
be made just as bad as just running a generator. Instead of the desired final product,
which is offered and sold and delivered, we get scrap paper and insolvency.

To establish an org one has to put one there. This requires a desirable and
economic product of the org envisioned, the technology of making the final

product,
location,

the technology of making and handling the org, the procurement of a
recruitment, an org bd, hats, and training and the equipment and ma-

teriel needed to produce the final product and the obtaining of the raw material
to make the final product. Thus established, it must be done so that:

i.
ii.

ili.

The amount of org is created proportionate to its final product demand.
The quality of the org itself—shabby, posh, active or lazy, etc.

The viability of the org (how long will it last economically, how will it
expand, does income exceed outgo, etc.).

The product of the org itself is regulated by:

IV.

Vi.

The quantity of product produced (which must be of sufficient volume
to satisfy demand).

The quality of the org’s product or products (which must be adequate to
satisfy those requiring and paying for the production).

The viability of the org’s product (how long does it last and is it ad-
equate for its value).

The repair of the org itself must be:

Vil.

Viil.

The quantity or amount of repair necessary to make the org functional
(which may amount to simply giving it a new letterhead or rebuilding
the whole place, nearly the establishing product again).

The quality or expertness of the repair (a bad one could destroy the
place).

The viability of the repair (if the right Why is handled, the repair as a
product will last a long time; and if a wrong reason for decline is han-
dled, the place will just cave in again).

The correction of the org’s product to obtain a uniformly satisfactory product:

X.

The quantity (proportion) of the org’s product that has to be corrected
(which might require, if too high, the repair of some part of the org itself).

228
xi. The quality of the correction (expert and can be afforded and itself
nondestructive).

xii. The viability of the product corrected. (Will it last and be nearly as
good as the better produced product?)

All these factors must be consulted.

ANALYSIS

If one understands these factors and realizes they are all present in running
an eggbeater or the world’s biggest oil company, one will not be groping around
in rags.

A checklist of the twelve factors influencing the four major products can be
made up and each point as it relates to an org can be studied about a particular org.

One has here the basics. From these there can arise a near infinity of lesser
items.

When one does not know these basics, one flounders endlessly while at-
tempting to handle a post, a portion of an org or the whole org. One gets into a
frantic correct-the-errors-and-outpoints or goes into apathy as he has no guide-
lines.

However, using these basics, one can easily check them off and so see what
he has to do to more closely approach the ideal.

In Dianetics and Scientology, for example, the final pe product of Flag audi-
tors trained on the same HCOBs as field auditors, on rougher pcs, is infinitely
better than the pc product elsewhere. This is a puzzle. The clue is not in auditing
at all. It lies in an earlier product—training. A Class VI or a Class VIII Auditor
on Flag was trained (a) more rapidly (amounting to as little as Yeth of the time in
an org) and (b) more honestly, and (c) the Flag auditor is expertly corrected as a
product when he begins to audit until the auditing product is perfect. The train-
ing (quantity, and lasting quality) on the course is better and the training extends
to training on post until the auditor’s product (the auditing of the pc and the pc)
need little or no product correction. The equivalent used to be required HGC
training—on-post training—for a staff auditor to become a staff auditor. In no
org did auditors go fresh from school into auditing with no further training. This
went out in some orgs. The product “corrected auditor” became a missing prod-
uct. Thus Flag auditing produces a better product as that product—corrected
auditor—exists on Flag.

This is given to show the use of the product factors.

Where any of these products or factors are missing, the viability of the
whole is shaken. By using them the whole becomes viable.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

229
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 1 NOVEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Org Series 11

ORGANIZATION AND MORALE

Morale is a large factor in organizing.

An executive is utterly dependent upon the willingness of those who work for
him. (How to Live Though an Executive)

Willingness, while it is also a factor in morale, is also a manifestation of
morale.

Morale, the tone of a group, is the target of ‘“‘do-gooders,” the ‘‘one-
worlders,” the labor agitator, the commie agent, the local minister and a general
mixed company of often well-meaning but nevertheless deadly people.

“You poor fellow. They treat you so badly . . . we will take up this great
injustice . . . workers should have everything free . . . communist imperialist
aggressors against poor working people . . . You poor fellow, God will make
you welcome in his heaven from this earthly toil . . . Kill the managers . .

”

Down with law and order. . . .

Well, it all winds up in revolution eventually and mounds of dead workers
and a few dead managers.

So let’s look this over.

If you can do something about an ill situation you do. If you can be effec-
tive, you can at least make the situation easier. If you can’t do that you can
sympathize.

Sympathy with the abused apparently not only does no good but winds up
in revolt!

How?

You have this young girl, see. She is wearing last year’s dress. No new
clothes. So you say, “You poor thing wearing last year’s dress.’ Up to now she
wasn’t worried about it. Now she says, “I wish I had some new clothes.” And
you say, “You poor thing. Doesn’t your mother ever buy you new clothes?”
“No.” “The beast!’ She goes home and revolts.

Get it?

The UN says, “Every woiker, he got to have job, house, lotsa dough.”
Worker says, “Who? Me?” “Yes you poor downtrodden sod.” And the UN says,

230
“United States. You rich. You pay!” US pitches out the foreign aid. The coun-
tries take the dough and revolt and elect a military junta that chops off heads
every hour on the hour.

The one-world do-gooders in the US say, “US, you pay poor fired woikers!”’
US puts out sixty-three billions. You can’t walk down a street. Riot and insur-
rection.

Why?
Sympathy. But not one brain cell worth of organization.
People want to be part of things, part of life.

If the clod heads that pass for modern politicians had the ability to organize
and handle an economy (in big countries or small) people could easily be part of
things and build the place up. It is in fact a highly skilled activity. And currently
quite beyond the heads of nations. Or they wouldn’t have unemployment, riots,
inflation and future death.

Take Russia. (You take her, I don’t want her.) She had half a century of
growing revolt. The oatmeal-brained Romanoffs spent their roubles on war and
secret police. Up jumped Lenin, ‘‘You poor woikers!” Revolt. Dead Czar. Dead
Russia. Their ‘workers’ paradise” can’t feed itself. The Czars were supremely
awful. Their commissars weren’t even that good. One secret policeman per
worker was about the ratio in Stalin’s day.

Let’s be practical. Who is going to build this UN house for the poor worker?
Who is going to pay the billions except the worker?

And if, as we so glaringly see, the end product of all this “poor worker’’ is
riot and civil commotion, insurrection and piles of dead workers then mightn’t
there be something a bit awry with its morale value?

Sympathy is a morale depressant. And knowingly or not, a morale destroyer.

If the person who sympathized was good enough to do something about it he
would.

There’s nothing at all wrong with righting evil conditions. Far from it.

But if you want to better things KNOW HOW TO ORGANIZE.

Don’t just stir up a revolt that will get workers machine gunned.

If the chronic moaner knew how to throw together an organizing board and
groove in the lines, as part of the state or the opposition, he could certainly
change things for the better.

Organizing is the know-how of changing things.

Good morale is the product of good organization!

If you organize something well and efficiently you will have good morale.
You will also have improved conditions.

231
Wherever morale is bad, organize!

A very careful survey of people shows that their basic protests are against
lack of organization. “It doesn’t run right!” is the reason they protest things.

Inequalities of workload, rewards unearned, no havingness, these are some
of the things that are snarled about.

They are cured by organizing things.

Russia Siberiaed or shot all her managers, thinking managers and capitalists
were the same thing. Then she couldn’t feed her people.

And you can’t even discuss morale as a subject when a country has to be
held together with barbed wire frontiers to hold in its own secret policed people!

The only thing I really have against communists is that they know how to
make a revolt but not how to make a country.

And the only thing I have against the capitalist do-gooder is that all the corn
and games in the world will not make a viable country.

Neither system winds up in happiness or high morale.

The physical universe is no rose bed. But it can be confronted and can be
lived in by a group.

Whenever you see bad morale, behind it you will see chaotic disorganization.
A nation or an org follow the same laws.

Disorganization from any cause deprives people of wanted beingness, doing-
ness and havingness.

When you deprive people of those things you’re going to have pretty awful
morale.

And only organization and very good organization will bring about being-
ness, doingness and havingness.

All three factors must be served. And purpose and reason must exist.

A bum with a handout sandwich is a bum with a handout sandwich. You
can’t change anyone upward with sympathy. It is a witch’s weapon, a devil’s
curse. But you can change someone upward with organization.

Bad organization = bad morale.

Good organization equals good morale.

And good organization is something worked on by a group, not ordered un-
der pain of death.

The only tops that get blown when effective organization starts going in are
those who don’t want others to have things and take delight in suppression—in

232
other words good organization is only opposed by those who have reason to fear
others. For in organization lies the secret of a group’s strength.

A small group thoroughly organized can conquer the disorganized billions.
And have excellent morale while they’re doing it!

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

233
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 2 NOVEMBER 1970

Remimeo Issue II

Org Series 12

THE THEORY OF SCIENTOLOGY ORGANIZATIONS

This “HCO Bulletin” 21 Sept. 58 explains how a Scientology organization
differs from “the industrial ideal.”

The industrial idea of organization is a cogwheel-type organization with
each member of it totally fixed on post, doing only exact duties, with all cog-
wheels intending to mesh. The industrial idea does not differentiate between a
machine and a human or live organization.

The product laws (Products 1, 2, 3 and 4 as given in this Org Series) apply
to both a live organization and a machine organization and any organization.
Since a live and a machine organization hold these laws in common, the indus-
trialist confuses the live organization and the machine organization.

HCO PL 29 Oct. 70, Org Series 10, THE ANALYSIS OF ORGANIZATION
BY PRODUCT, also carries a mention of this difference between a live and a
machine organization.

As the industrial idea has already been mentioned in this Org Series, and as
this Org Series mainly applies to live (not machine) organizations, and as people
tend to fall into a machine organization pattern (and also to use a live organiza-
tion to not know their own specialty best) this earlier issue on live organization is
published in full:

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
London

HCO BULLETIN OF 21 SEPTEMBER 1958
FOR ALL STAFF MEMBER HATS

THEORY OF SCIENTOLOGY ORGANIZATIONS

An organization is a number of terminals and communication lines united
with a common purpose.

The actions of an organization can all be classified under the heading of
particle motion and change. To analyze a post or a department or an organiza-
tion, make a list of each particle it handles (whether types of bodies, types of
comm or any other item) and follow each item from the point it enters the post or

234
department or organization to the point it exits. If a particle isn’t handled prop-
erly and passed along properly, there is a confusion or a dead end. To organize
an organization requires more than theory. One has to inspect and list the parti-
cles and get their routes and desired changes of character en route. Then he has
to see that terminals and comm lines exist to receive, change and forward the
particle. All types of particles belong to somebody, are handled some way, come
from somewhere and go somewhere. There are no confusions when lines, termi-
nals and actions exist for each type of particle.

Judgment and decision are needed in every staff post. If the handling of
items are just ‘‘petty details,” then so is your fellow man a “petty detail.”

There are no laborers in a Scientology organization. We are all managers of
these particles.

Routes of handling are not orders to handle but directions to go. A route is
not necessarily correct for all cases. It is only correct for most cases. Robots
can’t handle livingness. Robot organizations and robot civilizations fail. They
only seem to work—like the commie empire seems to work until you find out
everyone is starving to death in it. A perfect organization is not a machine but a
pattern of agreements. A route is only the agreed upon procedure. It is not only
occasionally broken, it now and then should be. The terminals involved make the
agreement or the route doesn’t work. A route along terminals that never agreed is
no route but a labyrinth. People agree to postulates they can understand and
appreciate. Hence, a route and handling begins with a particle, develops with a
theory, comes to life with an agreement and continues to work because of judg-
ment and decision.

The routing, the comm lines, the pattern of an organization do not do the work.
The work is done by living beings using good sense and skill. The organizational
pattern only makes their work easier and lessens confusion and overburden. Gov-
ernments, armies, big research bureaus reduce themselves down to routes and titles.
They don’t work. They don’t do work. They allow for no human equation.
Therefore, slave societies (composed only of routes and unthinking terminals) are
always beaten eventually by free peoples. There is a point where routes and exact
procedures become unworkable, just as there is a point, facing a volume of work,
that individuality and no teamwork becomes unworkable. An optimum organiza-
tion is never severely either one. Total individualism and total mechanization
alike are impossible. So if you or your department or your organization seem to
be too heavily inclined to either one, yell don’t talk. A bad organization will fire
you and you can do something more profitable. A good organization will listen.
BUT—always have a better idea than the one in use. Grumbling, refusing to
work, don’t work. A better idea, talked over with the terminals on either side of
you, put down in concise writing, submitted, will be put into action in a good
organization. Of course, there’s always a chance that the new proposed handling
throws something out of gear elsewhere. If it does, you have the right to know
about it.

An “organization” doesn’t get the work done. As an orderly plan it helps its
terminals get the work done. The staff as individuals do the work. An organiza-
tion can help or hinder getting the work done. If it helps, it’s good. If it hinders,
it should be examined thoroughly.

235
An organization can work wholly at “taking in its own laundry.” All the
work that gets done is the work generated inside the shop by unreal routes and
weird changes of particles. This is a government circa mid-twentieth century. Its
highest skill is murder which in its profundity it makes legal.

A totally democratic organization has a bad name in Dianetics and Scientology
despite all this talk of agreement. It has been found by actual experiment (LA
1950) that groups of people called on to select a leader from among them by
nomination and vote routinely select only those who would kill them. They select
the talkers of big deeds and ignore the doers. They seem to select unerringly the
men of average skill. That is never good enough in a leader and the people suffer
from his lack of understanding. If you ever have occasion to elect a leader for
your group, don’t be “democratic” about it. Compare records as follows: Take
the person who is a good auditor, not just says he is. Take the person who has a
good, not necessarily the highest, profile and IQ. Take the person who can grant
beingness to others. And look at the relative serenity and efficiency of any past
command he may have had. And even then you’re taking a chance. So always
elect temporarily and reserve the right of recall. If his first action is to fire peo-
ple, recall him at once and find another leader. If the organization promptly
prospers, keep him and confirm the election by a second one. If the abundance
of the organization sags in a month or so, recall and find another. Popularity is
some criteria—but it can be created for an election only, as in the US. Select in
an election or by selection as an executive the person who can get the work done.
And once he’s confirmed, obey him or keep him. He’s rare. But beware these
parliamentary procedure boys and girls who know all the legal and time wasting
processes but who somehow never accomplish anything except chaos. A skilled,
successful leader is worth a million impressive hayseeds. Democracies hate
brains and skill. Don’t get in that rut. In the US War Between the States, militia
companies elected their officers with great lack of success in battle. They finally
learned after tens of thousands of casualties that it was skill not popularity that
counted. Why be a casualty—learn first. Democracy is only possible in a nation
of Clears—and even they can make mistakes. When the majority rules, the mi-
nority suffers. The best are always a minority.

WHAT IS YOUR JOB?
Anything in an organization is your job if it lessens the confusion if you do it.

Your being exactly on post and using your exact comm lines lessens confu-
sion. But failure to wear another hat that isn’t yours now and then may cause
more confusion than being exactly on post.

The question when you see you will have to handle something not yours is this:
“Will it cause less confusion to handle it or to slam it back onto its proper lines?”

Example: A preclear wandering around looking for somebody to sell him a
book. You see him. The book sales clerk isn’t there. The books are. Now what’s
the answer? You’ll create a little confusion if you hand him a book, take his
money and give it to the book sales later. You’ll create confusion for your own
post and the organization if you go chasing around trying to find “book sales
terminal.” You’ll create a feeling of unfriendliness if you don’t help the preclear
get his book. Answer it by deciding which is less confusing. You’ll find out by
experience that you can create confusion by handling another’s particles but you

236
will also discover that you can create confusion by not handling another’s parti-
cles on occasion.

The only real error you can make in handling another’s particles is to fail to
tell him by verbal or written comm exactly what you did. You stole his hat for a
moment. Well, always give it back.

Remember, in a Scientology organization every Scientologist on staff poten-
tially wears not just his own but every hat in the organization. He has to know
more jobs than his own. Particularly jobs adjacent to his post. He often has to do
more jobs than his own because those jobs have to be done and he sees it. A
non-Scientology member of an organization is only limited in what he can do in
the organization by lack of know-how. But the limitation is applicable only to
instruction and auditing. But a Scientologist: he may find himself wearing any
hat in the place including mine. And others may now and then wear his hat.

A staff member gets the job done of (1) his own post, (2) his department and
(3) the whole organization.

People who are always off-line and off-post aren’t doing their own jobs.

When we find somebody always off-post and in our hair, we know if we look at
his post we’ll find a rat’s nest. So there are extremes here as well.

HOW TO HOLD YOUR JOB

Your hat is your hat. It is to be worn. Know it, understand it, do it. Make it
real. If it isn’t real, it is your fault since you are the one to take it up and get it
clean with an executive. If he doesn’t straighten it up so you can do it, it’s still
your fault if it’s not done.

You hold a job in a Scientology organization by doing your job. There are no
further politics involved—at least if I find out about it there aren’t. So do your
job and you’ve got a job. And that’s the way it is.

But on post or off, we only fail when we do not help. The “public” only
objects to us when we fail to help or when we fail to answer their questions. So
we have two stable data on which we operate whether we’re on post or not:

HELP PEOPLE!

ANSWER PEOPLE’S QUESTIONS EXACTLY!

When you don’t you let everybody down.
NEATNESS OF QUARTERS

— THE PUBLIC KNOWS US BY OUR MEST —

A part of everyone’s hats is keeping a good mock-up in people, offices,
classrooms, quarters.

Keep your desk and your mest neat and orderly. It helps.

237
And when you see things getting broken-down or run-down or dirty, fix them
or clean them or if you can’t, yell like hell on the right comm line.

THE DESPATCH SYSTEM
The despatch system is not there to plague you but to help you.

Except when you’ve got to have speed, never use an interoffice phone to
another terminal. And never write a despatch and present it and you at some
other point at the same time. That’s “off-line” just as a phone is “off-line.” A
good use of the organization’s lines reduces confusion. The other guy is busy,
too. Why interrupt him or her unnecessarily with routine that should go on the
lines? You’ll usually get an answer in the same day or at least in 24 hours. The
organization’s comm lines are pretty good. They make it possible for this small
handful of us to get more things done in this society than any other organization
on Earth in terms of actual accomplishment.

A comm line can be jammed in several ways. Principal of these is entheta.
Ask yourself before it goes on the lines—it’s bad news but is it necessarily im-
portant? Another is overburden. Too much traffic jams a line. Too long a des-
patch doesn’t get read. Another is too little data. That can jam a line but
thoroughly. It takes more despatches to find out what goes. Another way is to
bypass the line itself—this jams the terminal. The final way, in broad classes, to
jam a comm line is to put erroneous data on it.

The last is a pet hate of Scientology people. Generally its form is “every-
body knows.” Example: “They say that George is doing a bad job,” or “Nobody
liked the last newsletter.” The proper rejoinder is “Who is Everybody?” You’ll
find it was one person who had a name. When you have critical data omit the
“everybody” generality. Say who. Say where. Otherwise, you'll form a bad da-
tum for somebody. When our actions are said to be unpopular, the person or
persons saying so have names.

IN SUMMARY

A post in a Scientology organization isn’t a job. It’s a trust and a crusade.
We’re free men and women—probably the last free men and women on Earth.
Remember, we’ll have to come back to Earth someday no matter what “happens”
to us. If we don’t do a good job now, we may never get another chance.

Yes, I’m sure that’s the way it is.

So, we have an organization, we have a field we must support, we have a
chance.

That’s more than we had last time night’s curtain began to fall on freedom.
So we’re using that chance.
An organization such as ours is our best chance to get the most done. So

we’re doing it!

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

238
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 13 NOVEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Org Series 13

PLANNING BY PRODUCT

One of the cycles or correct sequences of action is:
BE—DO—HAVE

This sequence is often altered in orgs and even in individuals. Be is first in
the physical universe, Do is second, Have is third.

By getting it out of sequence a considerable confusion can be generated.

A lot of riddles of human behavior can be solved by realizing this goes out
of sequence or gets omissions.

The Spanish peasant and the Spanish officials go to war at the drop of a
straw. Their history is jammed with revolts. The peasant knows that if he is a
peasant (be) and does his work (do) he should have. The Spanish official is stuck
in BE. He has so he can be and he doesn’t have to do anything. Also a degree or
title in Spain is a BE and there is no do. So there is no have unless it comes from
the peasant. The two altered cycles collide.

Juvenile delinquency and shattered lives in the West stem directly from cor-
ruptions of this cycle.

Children in the West are commonly asked, “What are you going to BE when
you grow up?” It is a silly question and can drive any child up the wall. Because
it's the wrong question—hits the wrong end of the cycle. He can’t work out his
personal org bd easily.

He is also asked, “‘What are you going to DO in life?” That’s just as bad. It
is quite difficult to answer.

You have to do an org bd backwards—establish the product (have), find out
what to do to achieve it and only then really can you accurately discover what
one has to BE to accomplish this.

A lot of people and businesses fail because they don’t do this. A beingness
taken first all too often winds up in a doingness without any havingness resulting.

If we asked children, “What do you want to PRODUCE in life?” we could
probably get a workable answer. From that he could figure out what he’d have to
do to produce that and from that he could know what he had to BE. Then, with
a little cooperation, he would be able to lead a happy and valuable life.

239
Concentrating on BE? one finds him ready to BE all right, but then he
stands around the next fifty years waiting for his havingness to fall out of the sky
or slide to him via a welfare state.

The above data, missing in society, contributes to juvenile delinquency,
crime, the welfare state and a dying civilization.

It is a wrong personal org bd to BE only.
So it is with an activity or company.

What is the desired product that will also be desired by others? is the first
question one asks in organizing. It must be answered before one can adjust or
arrange finance or any org bd.

Then one asks what has to be done to produce that? And there may be a lot
of dones figured out and put in sequence.

Now one can work on BE.
Thus you would have the basic ingredients of an org bd.
Here is a common altered cycle:

Mr. A has a truck—HAVE. He tries to figure out what to DO with it. He
works it around to try to make money. He would usually go broke. As he sup-
poses he already has a product—a truck, and he needs a product— “money,” he
rarely backs it up to a BE.

Some people’s “think” gets all involved in altered sequences or omissions of
the BE—DO—HAVE cycle.

An activity has several final products. All of them must be worked out and
considered. Then one can work out the sequence of DOs (each with a product) in
order to accomplish the final products. Only then can one work out the BE.

By omission or fixations on one of these points, a person or an org can fail
or perhaps never even get started.

Fixation on DO without any product in view leads to bored wandering
through life.

Mothers even know this one. “Mama, what shall I do?” is a long-drawn
refrain. Smart mamas often say “Make a cake” or “Make mud pies” or “Make a
house.” Dumb ones say “Go and play and stop bothering me!”

Armies, with guard or death “products,” get obsessed with DO to a point
where officers and noncoms will state “Get those men busy!’’ No product.
Meaningless, often frantic and useless DO.

It could be said that any developed traffic (dev-t) comes from people who
have no product.

Immense bureaucracies can build up where there are no realized or stated
products.

240
Target policies and practice are successful because they state the desired
product.

Unless one organizes from the final product, the organization can get unreal
and useless.

Even Russia could learn this one. Their “workers” are all trying to get to the
university where they can BE. The Russian government was recently pleading
with young people to become workers. But of course that’s just another BE that
implies DO. Russia has yet to realize her product was and is revolution. It’s no
wonder their main problem is how to feed and clothe and house their people.

Unless an org or a person knows exactly what the final product is for the org
or a post, there’ll be a lot of busyness but not very much havingness for anyone.

The answer is to figure out the final product and work back through the do
of subprojects and you will then materialize a real org, a real beingness.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

241
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 NOVEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Org Series 14

THE PRODUCT AS AN OVERT ACT

When a product is nonexistent or bad it can be classified as an overt act
against both the org and any customer.

You can estimate what the existing scene of a post really is by looking at its
product.

When a flubby product is observed, you can at once approximate the existing
scene.

The time it takes to achieve the product is also an estimation. A long time to
achieve a small flubby product gives one a good idea of the existing scene.

This also estimates the amount of ‘‘noise” in an area.

Example: Post X is supposed to sort ruddy rods. There are no sorted ruddy
rods ready. That’s an omitted action. The post has to be ordered to sort ruddy
rods. That’s ordering someone to wear his hat which is altered sequence as he
should have been wearing it already. The post must be a false terminal as it isn’t
wearing its hat. The product so far is no sorted ruddy rods. You order them
sorted. You get bent tangled ruddy rods furnished after a long time period filled
with dev-t. Estimate of existing scene—psychotic and an awful long way from
any ideal scene. Actual quality of product—an overt act.

When several org members are furnishing a poor individual product, the org
becomes difficult to handle as the person in charge is operating as correction not
as establishment and org product.

Wherever an org’s product is low in quantity and quality, one must recognize
that it contains several members who unconsciously furnish overt acts in the guise
of post products and begin to straighten things out accordingly.

The road to sanity for such a person or org is a good grasp of organizing and
products, making known the technology needed to produce a product, getting it
properly done so that the person can then wear his hat.

If this still doesn’t occur, personal processing is necessary as the personnel
may well be dramatizing overt acts (harmful acts) by turning out a bad product.

The final product of an org is the combined products of all the members of
that org directed to accomplish the final products of that org.

Stupidity, lack of a worked out org bd, lack of recognition of what the final

242
org products should be, lack of training, lack of hats, can produce poor final
products. In an activity not doing well, the poor final product or its lack of any
product is the compound errors in subproducts. An org where the product is
pretty bad or nonexistent contains many elements—posts—in it which have as
their individual “post products” not products at all but overt (harmful) acts.

Pride of workmanship is pride in one’s own product.
Every post has some product. If the products of all posts in an activity are

good and the product sequence is good, then the final products of the org will be
good.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

243
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 20 NOVEMBER 1970
Remimeo
(Also issued as an HCOB,
same date and title)

Personnel Series 12
Org Series 15
Word Clearing Series 18

ORGANIZATION MISUNDERSTOODS

By Scientology study technology, understanding ceases on going past a mis-
understood word or concept.

If a person reading a text comes to the words “Felis domesticus” and doesn’t
know it simply means HOUSE CAT, the words which appear thereafter may
become “meaningless,” “uninteresting” and he may even become slightly uncon-
scious, his awareness shutting down.

Example: “Wind the clock and put out the Felis domesticus and then call
Algernon and tell him to wake you at 10:00 a.M.,” read as an order by a person
who didn’t bother to find out that “Felis domesticus” means “house cat” or “the
variety of cat which has been domesticated” will not register that he is supposed
to call Algernon, will feel dopey or annoyed and probably won’t remember he’s
supposed to wake up at 10:00 a.M.

In other words, when the person hit a misunderstood word, he ceased to under-
stand and did not fully grasp or become aware of what followed after.

All this applies to a sentence, a book, a post or a whole organization.

Along the time track a crashing misunderstood will block off further ability
to study or apply data. It will also block further understanding of an organiza-
tion, its org board, an individual post or duties, and such misunderstoods can
effectively prevent knowledge of or action on a post.

ALL THIS IS THE MOST COMMON CAUSE OF AN UNACCEPTABLE
POST PRODUCT, OR NO PRODUCT AT ALL.

The difficulties of an organization in functioning or producing stem from
this fact.

Personal aberration is the cause of products that are in fact overt acts.

Scientology technology today easily handles the personal aberration part of
the problem, IF IT IS USED AND PROPERLY APPLIED. Leaving an org un-
audited or being unable to figure out how to run a viable org so that it can afford
to audit its staff members is asking for post or org products that are overt acts.

244
Employing persons of the Leipzig, Germany, death-camp school (psycholo-
gists, psychiatrists) to handle personal] aberration is like throwing ink in water to
clean it up. Governments stupidly do this and wonder why their final product as
an organization is riot, war and a polluted planet. The point is not how bad
psychology and psychiatry are, but that one does have to handle personal aber-
ration in an organization, and these schools were too vicious and incompetent to
do so.

Those who are personally very aberrated are not about to produce anything
but an overt act. They are difficult to detect as they are being careful not to be
detected. Things “just sort of go wrong” around them, resulting in a product that
is in fact an overt act. But these constitute only about ten or twenty percent of the
population.

The remaining eighty percent or ninety percent where they are nonfunctional
or bungling are so because they do not understand what it’s all about. They have
in effect gone on by a misunderstood such as what the org is supposed to do or
the admin tech they use on their posts or where they are or what their product is.

Earth organizations like governments or big monopolies get a very bad re-
pute because of these factors:

\. Personal aberration of a few undetected and unhandled.

2. Inadequate or unreal basic education technology and facilities.
3. Inadequate or unknown organization technology.
4

Noncomprehension of the individual regarding the activities of which he
is a part.

Noncomprehension of the basic words with which he is working.
Purposes of the post uncleared.
Admin of the post not known or comprehended.

Technology in use not fully understood.

oe ND YY

A lack of comprehension of products.

Out of these nine things one gets organizational troubles and the belief that it
takes a genius to run one successfully. Yet all the genius in the world will fail
eventually if the above nine things are not handled to some degree.

The common methods currently in use on the planet to handle these things
are very crude and time-consuming, as the items themselves are either dimly
comprehended or not known at all.

1A. Personal aberration is met by torture, drugs or death when it is detected.
Yet only the very serious cases who are obviously screaming, muttering
or unconscious are singled out, whereas the dangerous ones are neither
detected nor handled at all and become with ease generals or presidents
or dictators, to say nothing of lesser fry. Ten percent to twenty percent of
any organization is stark, staring mad, doing the place in so adroitly
that only their actual product betrays them.

245
2A.

3A.

4A.

SA.

6A.

7A.

8A.

9A.

Basic education as well as higher general education has become a mass-
produced area crawling with bad texts and noncomprehension and used
mainly by hostile elements to overturn the state or pervert the race and
its ideals.

Organizational technology is so primitive as to change national maps
and leading companies many times a century, an extremely unstable
scene for a planet.

Very few individuals on the planet have any concept of the structure of
entities such as their country or state or company. Persons surveying the
public in the US, pretending to advise acceptance of “new measures”
already in the Constitution, were threatened for being revolutionaries.
Hardly anyone knew the basic document of the nation’s organization
much less its rambling structure.

The basic words of organization are glibly used but not generally compre-
hended—words like “company,” “management,” “policy.” Vocabularies
have to be increased before comprehension and communication occur and
misunderstoods drop out.

Post purposes are often glibly agreed with while something entirely dif-
ferent is done.

Administrative actions involving posts are often only dimly compre-
hended and seldom well followed; but in this matter of communication,
despatches, etc., the planet is not as deficient as in others except that
these functions, being somewhat known, can become an end-all—tons of
despatches, no actual product. In some areas it is an obsession, an end-
less paper chain, that is looked on as a legitimate product even when it
leads to no production.

The planet’s technology is on the surface very complex and sophisti-
cated but is so bad in actual fact that experts do not give the planet and
its populations thirty years before the smoke and fumes will have eaten
up the air cover and left an oxygenless world. (The converters like trees
and grass which change carbon dioxide to oxygen are inadequate to
replace the oxygen and are additionally being killed by air impurities
coming out of factories and cities.) If the technology destroys the base
where it is done—in this case the planet—it is not adequate and may
even be destructive technology.

The whole idea of “product” is not in use except in commercial industry

where one has to have a car that sells or a washing machine that actually
washes.

THE HARD ROAD

It is against this primitive background that one is trying to run an organization.

If it were not for improvements made on each one of these points, the task
could be hopeless.

246
I have gone to some length to outline the lacks in order to show the points
where one must concentrate in (a) putting an org together and (b) keeping it
viable.

In these nine areas we are dealing with the heart of it in running orgs.

Enthusiasm is a vital ingredient. It soon goes dull when insufficient attention
is paid to resolving and getting in these nine points.

Bluntly, if they are not gotten in and handled, the task of living and running
a post or an org will become so confused that little or no production will occur
and disasters will be frequent.

THE WORDS

The by-no-means-complete list of words that have to be fully cleared and
understood just to talk about organization as a subject, and to intelligently and
happily work in an org EVEN AS ITS LOWEST EMPLOYEE is:

A company

A board of directors
Top management
Policy
Management
Programs
Targets

Orders
Technology
Know-how

Org bd

Post

Hat

Cope

Purposes
Organize

Duties

A checksheet

A checklist

A comm channel
A command channel
A relay point

A stable terminal
Double-hatted

A product
Aberration
VIABILITY

This is key vocabulary. One could draw up a whole dictionary for these
things and no one studying it would be any wiser since it would become salted
with other words of far less importance.

The way to do this list is sweat it out with a meter until one knows each can’t
mean anything else than what it does mean.

247
Out of a full understanding of what is implied by each, a brilliantly clean
view is attained of the whole subject of organization, not as a fumble but as a
crisp usable activity.

Unless one at least knows these words completely so that they can be used
and applied, they will not buffer off confusions that enter into the activity.

Glibness won’t do. For behind these words is the full structure of an activity
that will survive and when the words aren’t understood the rest can become
foggy.

We do know all these needful things. We must communicate them and use
them successfully.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

248
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 25 NOVEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Org Series 16

POLICY AND ORDERS

Probably the greatest single confusion that can exist in the subject of organ-
izing is the reversal of “policy” and “orders.”

When definitions of these two things are not clearly understood, they can be
identified as the same thing or even reversed.

When they are not understood plainly, then staff members set their own pol-
icy and demand orders from top management, totally reversing the roles.

Confusion thus generated can be so great as to make an organization unman-
ageable. It becomes impossible for staff to do its job and management cannot
wear its hat.

People in an organization obsessively demand orders from policy source and
then act on their own policy. This exactly reverses matters and can be a continual
cause of disorganization.

As policy is the basis of group agreement, unknown policy or policy set by
the wrong source leads to disagreement and discord.

Demanding or looking for orders from policy source and accepting policy
from unauthorized sources of course turns the whole organization upside down.
The bottom of the org board becomes the top of the org board. And the top is
forced to act at lower levels (order issue) which pulls it down the org board.

But this is not strange as we are dealing here with principles rather new in
the field of organization, principles which have not been crisply stated. THERE
IS NO EXACT ENGLISH WORD for either of these two functions.

POLICY as a word has many definitions in current dictionaries amongst
which only one is partially correct: ““A definite course or method of action to
guide and determine future decisions.” It is also “prudence or wisdom,” “a
course of action” and a lot of other things according to the dictionary. It even is
said to be laid down at the top.

Therefore the word has so many other meanings that the language itself has
become confused.

Yet, regardless of dictionary fog, the word means an exact thing in the spe-
cialized field of management and organization.

249
POLICY MEANS THE PRINCIPLE EVOLVED AND ISSUED BY TOP
MANAGEMENT FOR A SPECIFIC ACTIVITY TO GUIDE PLANNING AND
PROGRAMING AND AUTHORIZE THE ISSUANCE OF PROJECTS BY EX-
ECUTIVES WHICH IN TURN PERMIT THE ISSUANCE AND ENFORCE-
MENT OF ORDERS THAT DIRECT THE ACTIVITY OF PERSONNEL IN
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION AND VIABILITY.

POLICY is therefore a principle by which the conduct of affairs can be
guided.

A policy exists, or should exist, for each broad field or activity in which an
organization is involved.

Example: The company has a lunchroom for its employees. Top policy con-
cerning it might be “To provide the employees cheaply with good food and clean
fast service.” From this the lunchroom manager could plan up and program how
he was going to do this. With these approved, they form the basis of the orders he
issues.

Now, let us say the manager of the lunchroom did not know organization and
that he did not try to get a policy set or find if there was one and made up his
own policy and planned and programed and issued his orders on that. Only the
policy he makes up is “To make dough for the company.”

Now the wild melee begins.

Top management (the lunchroom manager’s highest boss) sees stenos eating
cold lunches brought from home at their desks. And begins to investigate. How
come? Stenos then say, ‘‘We find it cheaper to eat our own lunches.” Top man-
agement finds coffee in the lunchroom is terrible and costs several shillings.
Dried-out sandwiches cost a fortune. There is no place to sit... etc. So top
management issues orders (not policy). “Feed that staff!” But nothing happens
because the lunchroom manager can’t and still “make dough for the company.”
Top management issues more orders. The lunchroom manager thinks they must
be crazy at board level. How can you make dough and still feed the whole staff?
And top management thinks the lunchroom manager is crazy or a crook.

Now you multiply this several times over in an organization and you get bad
feeling, tension and chaos.

Let us say top management had issued policy: “Establish and run a lunch-
room to provide the employees cheaply with good food and clean fast service.”
But the lunchroom manager hired knew nothing of organization, heard it, didn’t
realize what policy was and classified it as a “good idea.” Idealistic, probably
issued for PR with employees. “But as an experienced lunchroom man I know
what they really want. So we’ll make a lot of dough for the company!”

He thereafter bases all his orders on this principle. He buys lousy food
cheap, reduces quality, increases prices, cuts down cost by no hiring and does
make money. But the company gets its income from happy customers who are
handled by happy staff members. So the lunchroom manager effectively reduces
the real company income by failing to cater to staff morale as was intended.

250
UNPREDICTABLE

It is a complete fact that no top management can predict WHAT policy will
be set by its juniors.

The curse of this is that top management depends on “common sense” and
grants greater knowledge of affairs to others at times than is justified. “Of course
anybody would know that the paper knives we make are supposed to cut paper.”
But the plant manager operates on the policy that the plant is supposed to provide
employment for the village. You can imagine the squabble when the paper knives
which do NOT cut paper fail to sell and a threatened layoff occurs.

Nearly all labor— management hurricanes blow up over this fact of ignorance
of policy. It is not actually a knowing conflict over different policies. It’s a con-
flict occurring on the unknown basic of unknown or unset policy of top manage-
ment and the setting of policy at an unauthorized level.

ORDERS
“Order” takes up two small print columns of the two-ton dictionaries.
The simple definition is:

AN ORDER IS THE DIRECTION OR COMMAND ISSUED BY AN AU-
THORIZED PERSON TO A PERSON OR GROUP WITHIN THE SPHERE OF
THE AUTHORIZED PERSON’S AUTHORITY.

By implication an ORDER goes from a senior to juniors.

Those persons who do not conceive of an organization larger than a few
people tend to lump all seniors into order-issuers, tend to lump anything such a
senior says into the category of order and tend to lump all juniors into order-
receivers.

This is a simple way of life, one must say.

Actually it makes all seniors bosses or sergeants and all juniors into workers
or privates. It is a very simple arrangement. It does not in any way stretch the
imagination or sprain any mental muscles.

Unfortunately such an organized arrangement holds good for the metal sec-
tion of the shop or a platoon or squad. It fails to take into account more sophis-
ticated or more complex organizations. And it unfortunately requires a more
complex organization to get anything done.

Where one has squad mentality in a plant or firm, one easily gets all manner
of conflict.

Few shop foremen or sergeants or chief clerks ever waste any time in trying
to tell the ‘‘rank and file” what the policy is. “Ours was not to reason why” was
the death song of the Light Brigade. And also the open door to communism.

Communism is unlikely to produce a good society because it is based on
squad mentality. Capitalism has declined not because it was fought but because it

251
could not cope with squad mentality. The policies of both are insufficiently embrac-
ive of the needs of the planet to achieve total acceptability.

An order can be issued solely and only because its issuer has in some fashion
attained the right to issue the instruction and to expect compliance.

The officer, the chief clerk, the shop steward, the sergeant, each one has a
license, a warrant, a “fiat” from a higher authority which entitles him to issue an
order to those who are answerable to him.

So where does this authority to issue orders come from?

The head of state, the government, the board of directors, the town council,
such bodies as one could consider top management in a state or firm, issues the
authority to issue orders.

Yet such top persons usually do not issue authority to issue orders without
designating what the sphere of orders will be and what they will be about.

This is the policy-making, appointment-making level at work.

All this is so poorly and grossly defined in the language itself that very odd
meanings are conceived of “policy” and “orders.”

Unless precise meanings are given, then organization becomes a very con-
fused activity.

Understood in this way, the following sentence becomes very silly: ‘“‘The
board of directors issued orders to load the van and the driver was glad to see his
policy of interstate commerce followed.”

Yet a group will do this to its board of directors constantly. ““You did not
issue orders. . . .” ““We were waiting for orders. . . .” “I know we should have
opened the doors but we had no order from the council... .”

The same group members, waiting for orders to sit or stand by special board
resolution, will yet set policy continually. ““We are trying to let others do their
jobs without interference.” “J am now operating to make each member of my
department happy.” “J am running this division to prevent quarrels.”

Ask officers, secretaries, in-charges, “What policy are you operating on?”
and you will get a quick answer that usually is in total conflict or divergence

from any board policy. And you will get a complaint often that nobody issues
their division orders so they don’t know what to do!

The fact is that POLICY gives the right to issue orders upon it to get it in,
followed and the job done.

A group of officers each one issuing policy madly while waiting for the head of
the firm to give them orders is a scene of mix-up and catastrophe in the making.

Policy is a long, long-range guiding principle.

252
An order is a short-term direction given to implement a policy or the plans
or programs which develop from policy.

“People should be seated in comfortable chairs in the waiting room” is a policy.

“Sit down” is an order.

If policy is understood to authorize people to issue orders, the picture be-
comes much clearer.

“Clearing post purpose” is another way of saying “Get the policy that es-
tablishes this post and its duties known and understood.”

Unless an organization gets this quite straight, it will work in tension and in
internal conflict.

When an organization gets these two things completely clear, it will be a
pleasant and effective group.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

“Light Brigade: a British brigade (600 men), knowing the folly of their orders, charged the Russian line
and was decimated on 25 Oct. 1854 in the Crimean War.

293
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 1 DECEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Org Series 17

REALITY OF PRODUCTS

The character of the VALUABLE FINAL PRODUCTS OF AN ACTIVITY
is something which must be established EXACTLY.

Example: Ajax Ball Bearings Ltd. did well for a while and then went into a
decline. The exact change point into the decline coincided with a change to new
stockholders and considerable executive and staff turnover. At first glance the
Why would have seemed to be so many transfers—musical chairs. However, a
complete survey shows that the definitions of Ajax valuable final products were
changed from “useful ball bearings sold in quantity at a profit” to “world accept-
ance of Ajax.”” The big ad campaigns, internal shop and accounting policy shifts
to accomplish this, the new fuzzy ideas about it and failure to spot the Why took
Ajax down. Traced further it was found that the new advertising manager had
originated this policy and the new board had only a foggy notion of its duties and
knew nothing of “valuable final products.” The whole company started “manu-
facturing” acceptance instead of ball bearings. The production shop got more
and more idle, more and more neglected, had fewer and fewer men in it. Admin
got more and more people and down, down, down went the stats.

A survey of any activity, requesting a list from each member of the company
answering the question, “What are the valuable final products of this company?”
can reveal much and can show that many are setting policies and doing things in
the company name which have no real relation to what the company is doing and
therefore drive the activity in contrary and conflicting directions.

After all it is the crew, staff members and workers who do the work. When
they have to set their own policy and use their own ideas of the valuable final
products, you can get a lot of conflicts and upsets which should never exist.

Make no mistake: An activity can be totally unmanageable and become non-
viable over just these points. Possibly all labor-management upsets come from
them.

1. Policy is set by top management after experience and agreed upon by
others. Where policy is needed it should be requested from the top, not
set independently by the supervisors or workers.

2. The valuable final products of an activity must be very carefully sur-
veyed, established and clearly released at policy level AS POLICY.

Anarchy appears to fail (as it did before the Spanish revolution 1936) and
strong central management succeeds around this one point of policy. Everyone

254
sets his own in an anarchy. Businesses succeed only on that point and the precise
establishment of valuable final products.

When the exact valuable final products are known and agreed upon, only
then does successful group action’ become possible.

The car industry looks easy. The valuable final product is a car. But auto-
motive labor and unions have not agreed to that. Their ‘valuable final product”
is ‘“‘a big paycheck.” This one point damaged and may have irreparably destroyed
the US economy in 1970 when General Motors, the country’s largest industry,
had a walkout and layoff. Failing to handle this one point GM management was
failing duty as management (they lost their general manager last year due to a
Ford maneuver of hiring him over, then firing him). Labor in this case ruined
their future paychecks and lost thousands of jobs.

Forty years ago a similar inability to set policies and establish valuable final
products began to wipe out the coal industry in the US. Under a John L. Lewis,
the miners made coal mining economically impossible. Management, mostly ab-
sentee and careless, half a century before that had begun to make errors, run
unsafe mines and look on an appearance in society pages as a valuable final
product. Today ‘‘Appalachia” is a ruined poverty area. And oil is the fuel—of
which there is little compared to US domestic coal.

So do not discount these two points. They are capable of wicked backlashes
when not done right. They are the Why of not only organization failures but also
the failures of civilizations.

PRECISE WORDING

The valuable final products of any activity small or large must be very pre-
cisely and totally listed and totally continually posted.

The valuable final products of a division should be on the org board under
the division and the valuable final products of the org should be on the org board
in a glaring red list.

Let us take a college. US colleges and others are so clouded up with “gov-
ernment projects” and “scientific findings” and “published papers” and “sport
wins” and “general public awe of their greatness” that they have pretty well
forgotten a “well-trained and successful student in the field of his major.” So the
student body product becomes “revolt.” And the college product becomes “???”
in the public mind. I do not speak idly. The very last thing a college wants in a
student is one who is an individual success. A downtrodden anonymous member
of some industrial team or an underpaid professor is about as high as a college
will tolerate from their student bodies according to surveys. For several hundred
years, since Francis Bacon (1561-1626) in fact, there has been no renowned phi-
losopher who had not been eased carefully out of his college long before gradu-
ation. The list exceptions are tame sellouts like Dewey, part of the Leipzig death
camper crew.

So here is civilization at risk. The valuable final product of its educational
institutions is not stated and is neglected in favor of a multitude of false or value-
less products. They are not known by their students but by their arrogance and
political connections. This is not idle data. Failure to understand this fact of
valuable final products began around 1862, the downfall of imperial Russia,

255
spearheaded by its college students. Having no real valuable final product,
clearly stated and agreed upon, opens the door to conflict not only in the com-
pany but in the state and the entire civilization. (Granted, imperial Russia stank,
which is my exact point. So did Stalinism.)

Studying back and forth over history, poking about in old ruins, remember-
ing, adding it up, the apparent causes of organizational decay are:

a. Failure to have an informed, trained top management capable of setting
real policy in accordance with the need of the organization.

b. Failure of top management to set policy.

c. Company members, supervisors and workers setting their own policy out
of agreement with or in ignorance of the needs of the organization and
themselves.

d. Failure of top management to wisely, completely and precisely establish
the valuable final products of the activity.

e. Ignorance of or disagreement with the valuable final products by workers
and company members.

In a much more general sense we would have:
A. Unwise or unset policy.
B. Unreal or unstated or undone valuable final products.

These apply to any organization of any size. The most flagrant offenders are
governments. I have never met a political leader or police officer who had a clue
about valuable final products of the state. You or I might feel that “public safety”
was a valuable final product of police, but the police don’t say so.

In amongst psychiatry I have worked for hours trying to make numerous
psychiatrists state what they were trying to accomplish. I have never even gotten
one to hazard even a suggestion of why he was doing what he was doing, much
less say “a cured patient” or “‘a safeguarded society.”

The confusion on these points of valid policy and valuable final product is
so great in the world of this writing as to be intolerable.

So do not feel strange that in our early organizations it has been hard to
handle things—they were cheek by jaw with a society that believed itself a jungle
and where “moral” standards were being set by the psychiatrists who gave the
world Hitler and twelve million exterminated Germans.

When the society goes in this direction (war, murder, psychiatry) it conceives
its valuable final product to be dead men.

Thus it is very, very important for us to get these hitherto obscure or uniden-
tified principles up into the light where they belong and to USE them.

1. The beings of top management must be fully informed and capable of

256
setting or knowing and publishing policy according to the need (includ-
ing viability) of the organization which will be agreed upon by the
whole activity. This means an informed, trained top management and
includes org management.

2. Top management and managers must KNOW policy and be able to set
or request policy where it is unknown or nonextant.

3. All members (top management, managers, supervisors, technicians,
workers) must understand the mechanisms of setting policy, how to get it
set, know policy that is set and know what is valid policy and who sets it.

4. The valuable final products of an organization must be known to, pre-
cisely and completely established and defined by top management.

5. The valuable final products of an activity must be known fully to and
agreed upon by all beings in the organization including why, and the
abandonment of random products which are being done but which do not in
any way add up to valuable final products.

ECONOMICS

The economics of any group is such that it cannot tolerate offbeat products
and remain sound. This is true of any political group or commercial company.

All of the activities of a group in some way must add up to known valuable
final products of a group or it will, as an entity, shatter.

Even in a “moneyless state,” a barter economy, this remains factual.

Western civilization and Eastern alike have decayed on the altars of war
gods. Diplomatic and political incompetence have squandered their efforts and
brought them to inflation and then dust. A socialism where the population goes
unshod or a capitalism where a barrowload of bucks will not buy a loaf of bread
are paying for ignorance of their actual valuable final products and the squander-
ing of funds and effort on side issues.

One cannot appropriate or apportion funds without an intimate knowledge of
the valuable final products of the activity.

One cannot handle property unless one knows the valuable final products of
the activity.

One cannot assign personnel without huge waste of manpower unless one
knows the valuable final product.

Therefore one must be able to list and know the valuable final products of an
activity before one can:

i. Do financial planning.
li. Arrange, buy or sell property.
iii. Allocate spaces assigned for different functions.

iv. Assign personnel.

257
If one tries to do these things first and discover final products later, all ef-
forts to organize will be cancelled.

CENTRAL AUTHORITY

The valuable final products must be agreed upon and issued as policy and
additions to the list must be referred to the policy-making level of the group
before being confirmed as valid.

The aimless meanderings of contemporary societies show the absence of
such lists. It some time ago began to be stated and believed that society “just
took in each other’s washing”; and the joke, Parkinson’s Law, in which bureaucra-
cy multiplies automatically, both give evidence that society is believed not to have
any valuable final products even as faint as “a good life.”

Individual members of a group or society must know the valuable final prod-
ucts of the activity and must be in some agreement with them to have a success-
ful group.

SURVEYS

Surveys of what should be the valuable final products show mainly the spirit
of the matter. It should not be believed for a moment that a standard survey
would apply: a standard survey being the adding up of the answers and taking the
majority as useful.

Such a survey measures willingness concerning types or directions of activity.

Given this, setting the exact things the group can or should produce and
wording them exactly requires a lot of looking and a lot of work.

What products of the group are economically valuable? This is the key point
that will be overlooked. What, in short, can this group exchange with other
groups or society that will obtain things the group does not produce? This is the
heart of economics. The law of supply and demand applies.

This is too hardheaded an approach for a whole group to decide upon with-
out a great deal of personal work.

If the group has a past to assess, then it will previously have produced prod-
ucts from time to time that did demonstrate economic value. A search for and a
list of these is of primary value.

If the group has no past, it has some experience available from the society
which it can employ.

It can be taken as a rule that group members will not identify or phrase the
valuable final products. And it can be taken as another rule that it will in the
course of time lose those products from its production that were valuable.

Final is another word that will probably escape grasp. Subproducts leading
to final products will be given equal billing with the final product.

So three surveys have to be done.

258
What does the group think its final product should be? This gives willing-
ness and direction.

What have been the previous valuable final product successes of the group?
(That did exchange with other groups so the producing group can obtain things it
does not produce.) This in a new group would be a survey of what similar groups
have produced.

There would then be a period of intense and expert work by or for central
policy authority where questions like: Have times changed? Were these items ever
thoroughly offered? What was the relative value in light of their cost? Is recost-
ing necessary due to money value changes? Which ones really brought value
back to the group from others? Can we still produce these? Thus a list is drawn
up, precisely worded.

Then the final (3rd) survey can occur. This is the issue of the reworked list
above to the group to get them to look at it from their viewpoint and see if it is
feasible and any points missed and any expert opinion taken amongst the experts
in the group.

The final list of valuable final products could then be drawn and issued as
policy.

A special watchdog production tally officer could then be appointed to make
sure these valuable final products are being prepared for and produced.

Yes, it would take all that to get the list of valuable final products of an
activity.

The valuable final product list does not come wholly from top management.
The list does not come only from the group.

Major social and business catastrophes occur when (a) no list is set (b) top
management only sets the list or (c) the group sets the list up.

Phrases like ‘ta better world” or ‘“‘a big car” or “lots of customers” are quite
incomplete and unreal. Even the words ‘“‘an auditor” or “a release” are correct
but are not fully enough described to be good statements of a valuable final
product.

A notable example of all this occurred in the car industry when Edsel Ford,
ten years ago, did not survey past products and current demands and produced
“The Edsel.” Henry Ford half a century earlier had established the company
products as a cheap, small rugged automobile that would put America on wheels
and a big, expensive car to hold up the company image. “The Edsel” went in
between and millions were lost and scores of dealers were wiped out. No survey.
No precise product.

If all this seems commercial, remember that in any civilization a group has
to buy or acquire those things it does not produce. This is true in capitalism,
communism or tribal barter. There is no Santa Claus and even a corn and games
welfare state can go broke and always has.

Thus the valuable final product of a group must be valuable to another group

259
or individuals in society around it and sufficiently so that it can receive in return
things it wants or needs but does not produce. And it must DELIVER its valuable
final product, a point most often missed.

A group of knights in a castle on a hill had protection for the peasant as a
valuable final product. When they ceased to deliver and used only threat and
robbery the peasant eventually invented a longbow whose arrow could penetrate
armor and knighthood was no longer in flower.

All this is really quite simple. It is even in the Factors.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

260
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 6 DECEMBER 1970

Remimeo
Dept 14 Hats

Personnel Series 13
Org Series 18

THIRD DYNAMIC DE—-ABERRATION

The exact mechanism of 3rd dynamic (group or organization) aberration is
the conflict of COUNTER-POLICY.

Illegal policy set at unauthorized levels jams the actions of a group and IS
responsible for the inactivity, nonproduction or lack of team spirit.

Counter-policy independently set jams the group together but inhibits its
operation.

Out-reality on org bds, hats, etc., is to a large degree caused by disagree-
ments and conflicts which are caused by illegal policy.

If we had a game going in which each player set his own rules, there would
be no game. There would only be argument and conflict.

VARIETIES OF COUNTER-POLICY

At the start it must be assumed or effected that there is someone or some-
body to set authorized policy for the group. Absence of this function is an invi-
tation to random policy and group conflict and disintegration. If such a person or
body exists, new proposed policy must be referred to this person or body and
issued, not set randomly at lower levels or by unauthorized persons.

Policies so set by the policy authority must be informed enough and wise
enough to forward the group purpose and to obtain agreement. Ignorant or bad
policy even when authorized tends to persuade group members to set their own
random policy.

When no policy at all exists random policy occurs.

When policy exists but is not made known, random policy setting will occur.

Ignorance of policy, the need or function of it, can cause random policies.

Hidden not stated random policies can conflict.

Correct policy can be relayed on a cutative basis—a few words left off or a

qualifying sentence dropped which makes policy incorrect or null. “Children
may not go out” can be made out of “Children may not go out after midnight.”

261
Altered policy can be limitless in error.

Attributing a self-set policy to the authorized source can disgrace all policy
as well as pervert the leadership purpose.

Policy can be excluded from a zone of a group that should be governed by it.
“Pipe-making policy does not apply to the small pipe shop.”

Such masses of unnecessary policy can be issued that it cannot be assimi-
lated.

Policy can exist in large amounts but not be subdivided into relevant subjects
as is done in hat checksheets.

Disgrace of policy can occur in a subsequent catastrophe and render any
policy disgraceful, encouraging self-set policy by each group member.

CLEARING A GROUP
All authorized policy must be set or made available in master books and
adequate complete policy files. This makes it possible to compile hats and check-
sheets and issue packs.

Group surveys of “What policy are you operating on?” can reveal random
policy.

All bugged (halted) projects can be surveyed for illegal policy and cleaned
up and gotten going again.

Other actions can be taken all of which add up to:
1. Get existing policy used.

2. Get areas without policy crisply given policy from the authorized
source.

3. Debug all past projects of false policy.

4. De-aberrate group members as per the Organization Misunderstoods PL
and other materials.

5. Educate the group members concerning policy technology.

6. Set up systems that detect, isolate and report out-policy and get it cor-
rected and properly set, issued and known.

7. Monitor any new policy against statistics and include policy outnesses as
part of all statistical evaluations.

ADMIN SCALE

I have developed a scale for use which gives a sequence (and relative senior-
ity) of subjects relating to organization.

262
GOALS

PURPOSES

POLICY

PLANS

PROGRAMS

PROJECTS

ORDERS

IDEAL SCENES

STATS

VALUABLE FINAL PRODUCTS

This scale is worked up and worked down UNTIL IT IS (EACH ITEM) IN
FULL AGREEMENT WITH THE REMAINING ITEMS.

In short, for success, all these items in the scale must agree with all other
items in the scale on the same subject.

Let us take “golf balls” as a subject for the scale. Then all these scale items
must be in agreement with one another on the subject of golf balls. It is an
interesting exercise.

The scale also applies in a destructive subject. Like “cockroaches.”

When an item in the scale is not aligned with the other items, the project
will be hindered if not fail.

The skill with which all these items in any activity are aligned and gotten
into action is called MANAGEMENT.

Group members only become upset when one or more of these points are not
aligned to the rest and at least some group agreement.

Groups appear slow, inefficient, unhappy, inactive or quarrelsome only when
these items are not aligned, made known and coordinated.

Any activity can be improved by debugging or aligning this scale in relation
to the group activity.

As out-reality breeds out-comm and out-affinity, it follows that unreal items
on the scale (not aligned) produce ARC breaks, upsets and disaffection.

It then follows that when these scale items are well aligned with each other
and the group there will be high reality, high communication and high affinity in
the group.

Group mores aligned so and followed by the group gives one an ethical
group and also establishes what will then be considered as overts and withholds
in the group by group members.

This scale and its parts and ability to line them up are one of the most
valuable tools of organization.

263
DEBUG

When orders are not complied with and projects do not come off, one should
DETECT, ISOLATE and REPORT and handle or see that it is handled, any of
the scale items found random or counter.

If any item below POLICY is in trouble—not moving—one can move up-
wards correcting these points, but certainly concentrating on a discovery of ille-
gal or counter-policy. Rarely it occurs some old but legal policy needs to be
adjusted. Far more commonly policy is being set by someone, verbally or in
despatches, or hidden, that is bugging any item or items below the level of policy.

So the rule is that when things get messed up, jammed up, slowed or inactive
or downright destructive (including a product as an overt act) one sniffs about for
random or counter-policy illegally being set in one’s own area or “out there.”

Thus in the face of any outness one DETECTS—ISOLATES—REPORTS
and handles or gets handled the out-policy.

The detection is easy. Things aren’t moving or going right.

The isolation is of course a WHAT POLICY that must be found and WHO
set it.

Reporting it would mean to HCO.
Handling it is also very easy and would be done in Qual.

This admin tech gives us our first 3rd dynamic de-aberrater that works easily
and fast.

Why?
Well, look at the Admin Scale. Policy is just below purpose.
Purpose is senior to policy.

The person who is setting random or counter illegal policy is off group pur-
pose. He is other-purposed to greater or lesser degree.

From 1960 to 1962 I developed a vast lot of technology about goals and
purposes. If we define a goal as a whole track long, long-term matter and a
purpose as the lesser goal applying to specific activities or subjects we see
clearly that if we clean up a person’s purposes relating to the various activities in
which he is involved and on the eight dynamics we will handle the obsession to
set random or counter-policies!

So it is an auditing job and the tech for it is extensive. (The African ACC
was devoted to this subject. Lots of data exists on it.)

It happens however that around 20 percent (probably more) of any group’s
members are actively if covertly antigroup and must be handled at a less pro-
found level under “‘personal aberration” in the Org Misunderstoods policy ietter
before you can begin to touch purpose.

264
Thus any group member, since this tech remedy helps them all, would be
handled with:

1. General case de-aberration (called L10s on Flag).

2. Purpose handling for posts.

3. Org bd, hatting and training.

Those setting random or counter-purpose later detected would get further no.
2 and no. 3.

As the universe is full of beings and one lives with them whether he likes it
or not, if would be to anyone’s interest to be able to have functioning groups.

The only way a group jams up and (a) becomes difficult to live in, and (b)
impossible to fully separate from, is by random and counter-purposes.

If one thinks he can go off and be alone anywhere in this universe he is
dreaming.

The first impulse of a hostile being is “to leave” a decent group. What a weird one.
The only reason he gets in jams is his inability to tolerate or handle others.
There’s no road out for such a being except through.

Thus all we can do to survive even on the first dynamic is to know how to
handle and be part of the third or fourth dynamic and clean it up.

Probably the reason this universe itself is considered by some as a trap is
because their Admin Scale is out regarding it.

And the only reason this universe is sometimes a trial is because no one
published its Admin Scale in the first place.

All this is very fundamental first dynamic tech and third dynamic tech.

It is the first true group technology that can fully de-aberrate and smooth out
and free within the group every group member and the group itself.

Thus, combined with auditing tech, for the first time we can rely wholly on
technology to improve and handle group members and the group itself toward
desirable and achievable accomplishment with happiness and high morale.

Like any skill or technology it has to be known and done and continued in
use to be effective.

The discovery, development and practical use of this data has made me very,
very cheerful and confident and is doing the same thing on the test group.

I hope it does the same for you.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

265
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 DECEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Personnel Series 14
Org Series 19

GROUP SANITY

The points of success and failure, the make and break items of an organization are:
1. HIRING

2. TRAINING

3. APPRENTICESHIPS
4. UTILIZATION

5. PRODUCTION

6. PROMOTION

7. SALES

8. DELIVERY

9. FINANCE

10. JUSTICE

11. MORALE

These eleven items MUST AGREE WITH AND BE IN LINE WITH THE
ADMIN SCALE (Org Series 18 THIRD DYNAMIC DE-ABERRATION).

Where these subjects are not well handled and where one or more of these
are very out of line, the organization will suffer a third dynamic aberration.

This then is a SANITY SCALE for the third dynamic of a group.

The group will exhibit aberrated symptoms where one or more of these
points are out.

The group will be sane to the degree that these points are in.
Internal stresses of magnitude begin to affect every member of the group in

greater or lesser degree when one or more of these items are neglected or badly
handled.

266
The society at large currently has the majority of these points out.

These elements become aberrated in the following ways:

1. HIRING

The society is running a massive can’t-have on the subject of people. Auto-
mation and employment penalties demonstrate an effort to block out letting people
in and giving them jobs. Confirming this is growing unemployment and fantastic
sums for welfare—meaning relief. Fifty percent of America within the decade
will be jobless due to the population explosion without a commensurate expan-
sion in production. Yet production by US presidential decree is being cut back.
War, birth control, are two of many methods used to reduce population. THIS
THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A REFUSAL TO EMPLOY PEOPLE. EX-
CLUSION OF OTHERS IS THE BASIC CAUSE OF WAR AND INSANITY.

2. TRAINING

Education has fallen under the control of one-worlders, is less and less real.
Data taught is being taught less well. Less data is being taught. School and col-
lege unrest reflect this. Confirmation is the deteriorated basic education found in
teenagers such as writing. Older technologies are being lost in modern rewrites.
THIS THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A COVERT REFUSAL TO TRAIN.

3. APPRENTICESHIPS

The most successful industries, activities and professions of earlier centuries
were attained by training the person as an apprentice, permitting him to under-
study the exact job he would hold for a long period before taking the post. Some
European schools are seeking to revive this but on a general basis, not as an
apprentice system. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A DENIAL OF ADE-
QUATE EXPERIENCE TO SUCCEED.

4, UTILIZATION

In industries, governments and armed services as well as life itself, person-
nel are not utilized. A man trained for one thing is required to do something else.
Or his training is not used. Or he is not used at all. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSY-
CHOSIS IS FAILURE TO UTILIZE PEOPLE.

5. PRODUCTION

Modern think is to reward downstats. A person is paid for not working. Govern-
ments who produce nothing employ the most people. Income tax and other current
practices penalize production. Countries which produce little are given huge hand-
outs. War which destroys attains the largest appropriations. A THIRD DYNAMIC
PSYCHOSIS IS TO PREVENT PRODUCTION.

6. PROMOTION

Promotion activities are subverted to unworthy activities. True value is sel-
dom promoted. What one is actually achieving gets small mention while other
things are heavily promoted. Reality and PR are strangers. A THIRD DY-
NAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS UNREAL OR NONFACTUAL PROMOTION.

267
7. SALES

Sales actions are unreal or out of balance. Clumsy or nonfunctioning sales
activities penalize producers and consumers. In areas of high demand, sales ac-
tions are negligible even when heavy advertising exists. This is proven by the
inability to sell what is produced even in large countries so that production cut-
backs are continual threats to economies and workers. A population goes half-fed
in times of surplus goods. With curtailed car factories a nation drives old cars.
With a cut-back construction industry people live in bad houses. Sales taxes are
almost universal. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS THE IMPEDING OF
PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION TO POTENTIAL CONSUMERS.

8. DELIVERY

Failure to deliver what is offered is standard procedure for groups in the
humanities. Commercially it is well in hand.

9. FINANCE

One’s own experience in finance is adequate to demonstrate the difficulties
made with money. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS THE PERVERSION
OF FINANCE.

10. JUSTICE

Under the name of justice, aberrated man accomplishes fantastic injustices.
The upstat is hit, the downstat let go. Rumors are accepted as evidence. Police
forces and power are used to ENFORCE the injustices contained in | to 9 above.
Suppressive justice is used as an ineffectual but savage means of meeting situa-
tions actually caused by the earlier listed psychoses. When abuses on (1) to (9)
make things go wrong, the social aberration then introduces suppressive injus-
tices as an effort to cure. Revolt and war are magnified versions of injustices.
Excess people—kill them off in a war. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS
THE SUBSTITUTE OF VIOLENCE FOR REASON.

11. MORALE

A continuous assault on public morale occurs in the press and other media.
Happiness or any satisfaction with life is under continuous attack. Beliefs, ideal-
ism, purpose, dreams, are assaulted. INSANITY IS A REFUSAL TO ALLOW
OTHERS TO BE, DO OR HAVE.

Any action which would lead to a higher morale has to be defended against

the insane few. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A DETESTATION OF
HIGH MORALE.

The COMMON DENOMINATOR of all these insanities is the desire to SUC-
CUMB.

Insanities have as their end product self or group destruction.

268
These eleven types of aberration gone mad are the main points through
which any group SUCCUMBS.

THEREFORE, these eleven points kept sane guarantee a group’s SUR-
VIVAL.

EXAMPLES

Seeing all this in one example permits one to see that these third dynamic
insanities combine to destroy.

A. Believing it impossible to obtain money or make it, a firm cannot hire
enough people to produce. So has little to sell, which is badly promoted
and is not sold so it has no money to hire people.

B. Needing people for another job the firm robs them from a plant which
then collapses and fails to make money so no new people can be hired.
This reduces production so people have to be dismissed as they can’t be
paid.

C. Persons are in the firm but are kept doing the wrong things so there is
little production and no promotion or sales so there is no money to pay
them so they are dismissed.

D. A new product is put in. People to make it are taken from the area
already making a valuable product which then collapses that area and
there is not enough money to promote and selling fails so people are
dismissed.

The examples are many. They are these same eleven group insanities in play
upon a group, a firm, a society.

SANITY

If this is a description of group aberration, then it gives the keys to sanity in
a group.

1. HIRING

Letting people INTO the group at large is the key to every great movement
and bettered culture on this planet. This was the new idea that made Buddhism
the strongest civilizing influence the world has seen in terms of numbers and
terrain. They did not exclude. Race, color, creed, were not made bars to mem-
bership in this great movement.

Politically the strongest country in the world was the United States, and it
was weakened only by its efforts to exclude certain races or make them second-
class citizens. Its greatest internal war (1861-65) was fought to settle this point,
and the weakness was not resolved even then.

The Catholic Church only began to fail when it began to exclude.

Thus inclusion is a major point in all great organizations.

269
The things which set a group or organization on a course of exclusion are (a)
the destructive impulses of about 10 or [5 percent of the society (lunacy) and (b)
opposition by interests which consider themselves threatened by the group or or-
ganization’s potential resulting in infiltration, (c) efforts to mimic the group’s
technology destructively and set up rival groups.

All these three things build up barriers that a group might thoughtlessly buy
and act to remedy with no long-range plans to handle.

These stresses make a group edgy and combative. The organization then
seeks to solve these three points by exclusion, whereas its growth depends wholly
upon inclusion.

No one has ever solved these points successfully in the past because of lack
of technology to solve them.

It all hinges on three points: (1) the sanity of the individual, (2) the worth-
whileness of the group in terms of general area, planetary or universal survival,
and (3) the superiority of the group’s organization tech and its use.

Just at this writing, the first point is solved conclusively in Scientology. Even
hostile and destructive personalities wandering into the group can be solved and,
due to the basic nature of man, made better for the benefit of themselves and others.

The worthwhileness of the organization is determined by the assistance given
to general survival by the group’s products and the actual factual delivery of
those valid products.

The superiority of a group’s admin tech and its application is at this current
writing well covered in current developments.

Thus inclusion is almost fully attainable. The only ridges that build up are
the short-term defense actions.

For instance, Scientology currently must fight back at the death camp organi-
zations of psychiatry whose solution is a dead world, as proven by their actions in
Germany before and during World War II. But we must keep in mind that we
fully intend to reform and salvage even these opponents. We are seeking to in-
clude them in the general survival by forcing them to cease their nonsurvival
practices and overcome their gruesome group past.

There are two major stages then of including people—one is as paid organi-
zation personnel and one as unpaid personnel. BOTH are in essence being
“hired.” The pay differs. The wider majority receive the pay of personal peace
and effectiveness and a better world.

The org which excludes its own field members will fail.
The payment to the org of money or the money payment to the staff member
is an internal economy. Pay, the real pay, is a better personal survival and a

world that can live.

Plans of INclusion are successful. They sometimes contain defense until we
can include.

270
Even resistance to an org can be interpreted as a future inclusion by the org.
Resistance or opposition is a common way point in the cycle of inclusion. In an
organization where everyone wins eventually anyway the senselessness of resist-
ance becomes apparent even to the most obtuse. Only those who oppose their
own survival resist a survival-producing organization.

Even in commercial companies the best organization with the best product
usually finds competitors merging with it.

2. TRAINING

Basic training, hats, checksheets and packs MUST exist for every member of
a group.

Criminal or antisocial conduct occurs where there is no hat.

Any type of membership or role or post in the whole organization or its field
requires individual and team training. Only where you have a group member who
will not or cannot bring himself to have and wear a hat will you have any trouble.

This is so true that it is the scope of Personal Enhancement.

Ask yourself, ‘““Who isn’t trained on his post and hatted?” and you can an-
swer, “Who is causing the trouble?”

Basic training, slight or great, is vital for every member of a group, paid or
unpaid.

A field auditor must have a hat. A student needs a student hat, etc., etc.

This requires training.

Training begins in childhood. Often it has to be reoriented.

Training as a group member must be done.

Training in exact technology or in the precise tech of admin is not the first
stage of training. Basic training of group members, no matter how slight, must

exist and be done.

Otherwise group members lack the basic points of agreement which make up
the whole broad organization and its publics.

Training must be on real materials and must be rapid. The technology of
how to train is expressed in speed of training.

The idea that it takes 12 years to make a mud pie maker is false. TIME in
training does not determine quality of training. Amount of data learned that can
be applied and skills successfully drilled determine training.

That the society currently stresses time is an aberrated factor.

The ability to learn and apply the data is the end product of training. Not
old age.

271
The rate of training establishes to a marked degree the expansion factor of a
group and influences the smoothness of the group during expansion.

If training is defined as making a person or team into a part of the group
then processing is an influencing factor. The facilities for processing and quan-
tity available are then a determining factor in group expansion.

3. APPRENTICESHIP
Training on post is a second stage of any training—and processing—action.
This is essentially a familiarization action.

To have a person leave a post and another take it over with no ‘“‘apprentice-
ship” or groove-in can be quite fatal.

The deputy system is easily the best system. Every post is deputied for a
greater or lesser period before the post is turned over and the appointment is
made. When the deputy is totally familiar he becomes the person on the post.

Rapid expansion and economy on personnel tend to injure this step. Lack of
it can be very destructive.

Optimally there should be one or two deputies for every key post at all times.
This is a continual apprenticeship system.

Economically it has limitations. One has to weigh the losses in not doing it
against the cost in doing it. It will be found that the losses are far greater than
the cost, even though it increases personnel by at least a third for a given organi-
zation.

When an organization has neglected it as a system (and has turned over too
many posts without deputy or apprenticeship action) its economics may decay to
where it can never be done. This is almost a death rattle for an organization.

In a two-century-old, highly successful industry, only the apprentice system was
and is used (Oporto wine industry). The quality of the product is all that keeps
the product going on the world market. If the quality decayed the industry would
collapse. Apprenticeship as a total system maintains it.

Certainly every executive in an organization and every technical expert should
have a deputy in training. Only then could quality of organization be maintained
and quality of product guaranteed.

The total working organization should be on this system actually. And when-
ever a person is moved up off a post, the deputy taking over, a new deputy
should be appointed. The last step (appointment of a new deputy) is the one that
gets forgotten.

Failure to recruit new people over a period will very surely find the whole
organization declining soon solely because there is no apprentice system of depu-
ties. The organization expands, singles up the posts, promotes some unappren-
ticed people and begins to lose its economic advantage. Low pay ensues, people
blow off, and then no one can be hired. It’s a silly cycle, really, as it is prevented
easily enough by hiring enough soon enough when the org is still doing well.

272
The rule is DEPUTY EVERY POST AND NEWLY DEPUTY THEM
WHEN PROMOTIONS OCCUR.

The most covert way to get around this is just to call each person's junior a
deputy even though he has other duties. This makes it all look good on an org
board. “Do you have each post deputied?” “Oh yes!” But the deputies are just
juniors with posts of their own.

A deputy is used to run the same post as it is deputied for. This means a
double posting pure and only.

You'd be amazed at how much production an executive post can achieve

when it is also deputied and when the principal holder of the post will use the
deputy and gen him in, not get him to cover an empty lower post.

4. UTILIZATION
People must be utilized.
Equipment must be utilized.
Space must be utilized.

Learning to USE is a very hard lesson for some. Untrained people, bad
organization, poor machinery, inadequate space all tend to send one off utilization.

The rule is, if you’ve got it use it; if you can’t use it get rid of it.
This most specifically applies to people. If you’ve got a man, use him; if you
can’t use him get him over to someone who can use him. If he isn’t useful,

process and train.

Anyone who can’t figure out how to use people, equipment and spaces to
obtain valuable final products is not worthy of the name of executive.

Reversely we get what an executive or foreman is—an executive or foreman
is one who can obtain, train and use people, equipment and spaces to economi-
cally achieve valuable final products.

Some are very skilled in preparing people, systems, equipment, property
and spaces to be used. But if these then go to someone who does not USE them
you get a bad breakdown.

The welfare state and its inflation is a sad commentary on “executive ability.”

An executive whose people are idle and whose materiel is decaying is a
traitor to his people and the org, just that, for he will destroy them all.

UTILIZATION requires a knowledge of what the valuable final products are
and how to make them.

Action which doesn’t result in a final product that adds up to valuable final
products is destructive, no matter how innocent it seems.

273
Man has a planet as a valuable final product. Improper use of the countries
and seas, air and masses which compose it will wind up with the destruction of
man, all life on it and the usefulness of the planet. So proper utilization of any-
thing is a very real factor.

The 19th century industrialist, like the mad kings who built great structures,
used up men; they didn’t properly use men.

And not using them at all, the current fad, is the most deadly of all.

UTILIZATION is a big subject. It applies to resources, capabilities and many
other factors.

The question being asked in all cases is, “How can we USE this to economi-
cally obtain a valuable final product?”

Failing to answer that question gives one the “mysteries of life.”

5. PRODUCTION
One may be prone to believe there is no sense in any production at all. Such
a one would also be likely to say, “There is no sense at all.” Or, “If they keep on
producing it will become impossible to destroy it all.”

Production of some final valuable product is the chain of all production se-
quences.

Even the artist is producing a reaction. The reaction’s service in a wider
sphere to enforce it is what gives art its sense. A feeling of well-being or gran-
deur or light-heartedness are legitimate valuable final products, for instance.

The production areas and activities of an org that produce the valuable final
products are the most important areas and activities of the org.

6. PROMOTION

The acceptance of valuable final products and of their value depends in a
large degree upon (a) a real value and (b) a desire for them.

Promotion creates desire for the valuable final product.

The old saw that the man who builds a better mousetrap will have the whole
world coming to his door is a total falsity.

Unless the value is made known, and the desire created, the mousetraps are
going to go unsold.

Promotion is so important that it can stand alone. It can have limited success
even when there is no product! But in that case it will be of short duration.

Promotion must contain reality and the final product must exist and be de-
liverable and delivered for promotion to be fully successful.

Public relations and advertising and all their skills cover this area of promotion.

274
7. SALES
It is hard to sell what isn’t promoted and can’t be delivered.
Economics greatly affect selling.

Anything must be sold for a price comparable to its value in the eyes of the
purchaser.

COSTING is a precise art by which the total expenses of the organization
administration and production must be adequately covered in the PRICING al-
lowing for all losses and errors in delivery and adequate to produce a reserve.

PRICING (the amount being asked) cannot be done without some idea of the
total cost of the final valuable product.

The sale price of one final valuable product may have to cover the cost of
producing other products which are delivered without price.

PRICING however does not necessarily limit itself to only covering immedi-
ate cost of a product. A painting with a dollar’s worth of paint and canvas may
have a price of half a million dollars.

Also a painting used in promotion may cost two hundred dollars and be dis-
played at no cost at all to the beholder.

These relative factors also include the SKILL of the salesman himself and
there is much technology involved in the act of selling something to someone and
the world abounds in books on the subject.

Therefore sales (once promotion is done) are bound up really in COSTING,
PRICING AND SELLING.

The value in the eye of the purchaser is monitored by the desire created in
him for it. If this is also a real value and if delivery can occur then SELLING is
made very easy—but it is still a skilled action.

The production of a valuable final product is often totally determined by
whether or not it can be sold. And if it can be sold at a price greater than the
cost of delivering it.

That it gets sold depends on the salesman.

The skill of the salesman is devoted to enhancing the desire and value in the
eyes of the buyer and obtaining adequate payment.

8. DELIVERY

The subject and action of DELIVERY is the most susceptible to breakdown
in any organization. Any flaw on the sequence of actions resulting in a valuable
final product may deteriorate it or bar off final delivery.

There are many preparatory or hidden-from-public-view steps on a produc-
tion line. When any of these break down, delivery is imperiled.

Given the raw materials and wherewithal to make some valuable final prod-
uct, the valuable final product should occur.

275
WHEN A VALUABLE FINAL PRODUCT DOES NOT GET PRODUCED
AND CANNOT BE DELIVERED, REPAIR THE EARLIER STEPS OF ITS PRO-
DUCTION.

Example: An auditing result is not delivered. Don’t just repair the pc. Repair
training of auditors and C/Ses. Repair the assembly line before the valuable final
product. The subproducts are less visible. Yet they add up to the valuable final prod-
uct.

THE LAW OF THE IRREDUCIBLE MINIMUM occurs in all delivery
problems. Someone is trying to produce only the visible end product of a post or
production line and neglects the earlier contributory actions and products as these
are not plainly visible.

When an organization or its posts operate only on an irreducible minimum,
production goes bad and DELIVERY crashes.

Take a cook who has his post at an irreducible minimum. Food is appearing
on the table. If he reduced just one bit more the food would no longer be edible
at all. He neglects purchasing, menus and preparation. That these occur is invis-
ible to the diners. That food appears on the table is visible to the diners. If the
cook operates at any less level than he is, no edible food would be visible—
hence, irreducible minimum. The food served will be bad. But it will be visible.
Invisible-to-the-diners actions aren’t being done.

To improve the food, get the less visible actions done. Get the sequence of
actions all done. The result will be improved food.

Take training. The final valuable product is a trained auditor. The Course
Supervisor who runs his post on an irreducible minimum is simply there, appear-
ing to supervise.

His final product may be horribly unskilled. The teaching may take “forever.”

To improve this one goes earlier on the assembly line—materials, packs,
tapes, student tech services, recorder repair, scheduling—dozens of actions in-
cluding getting the Course Supervisor trained.

The visibility is still a Course Supervisor and students being taught. But with
the whole earlier line in, the final valuable product is excellent!

A being hopes lazily for instantaneous production. It doesn’t happen this
way in the MEST universe. Things are produced in a sequence of subproducts
which result in a final valuable product. Hope all you want to. When you omit
the subproducts you get no valuable final product.

When the people in an organization do not know the valuable final products
of the org and when a person on a post does not know the final products of his
post, a condition arises where no org DELIVERY will occur, or if it does occur
it will be poor or costly. It is vital that a person knows what his post final prod-
ucts are and what his unit, section, department and division subproducts are and
how his own and each of these contribute to the valuable final products of the
organization for actual delivery to occur.

Delivering other than valuable final products or useless final products or
final products that need constant correction also adds up to nondelivery.

276
A whole civilization can break down around the point of DELIVERY. So
can an organization.

Since money can be looked upon as too valuable a final product it can actu-
ally prevent DELIVERY.

Failure to deliver is the one point beings do not forgive. The whole cycle
hangs upon DELIVERY.

DELIVER WHAT IS PROMISED when it is expected, in sufficient volume
and adequate quality, is the first maxim even of a group in politics or the humanities.

9, FINANCE

Finance too often disregards the other factors in this scale or the other fac-
tors in this scale too often disregard finance for organizations to long remain
viable.

Financing must be in agreement with all the other factors of this scale and
all the other factors must be in agreement with finance for viability to occur.

Because money is interchangeable for commodities then people can confuse
it with too many things.

If you regard money like so many beans, as a commodity in itself, you open
the door to understanding it.

Money is so many beans in to get so many beans out.
When you can master this you can handle FINANCE.

The FINANCE persons of an org, a civilization, a planet, should put so
many beans in and expect more beans out than they put in. This is quite correct
as a viewpoint for finance.

The difference of beans in and beans out for a planet is made up by adding
beans enough to those already in existence to cover new commodity.

When finance people fail to do this beans cease to be in pace with produc-
tion and inflation and deflation occur.

In an org or any of its parts, industriousness of the staff makes the differ-
ence between the beans in and beans out.

An org has to have income greater than outgo. That is the first rule of fi-
nance. Violating it brings bankruptcy.

Now if the FINANCE people of an org apply the same rule remorselessly to
all its transactions (financial planning) with each person and part of an org,
finance becomes rea] and manageable.

So many beans in to support the first division means so many beans out of
the org back to finance because of the cooperative work of the first division.

A hectic effort to work only with production products will wind finance up
in a knot.

277
One has to estimate (cost) the contribution of each part of an org to the
valuable final product to know what to allow what part of an org.

Finance has to have a full reality on the valuable final products and the
subproducts and post products of the whole org to intelligently allocate funds.

This person, that division, each contributes some part of the action that re-
sults in the money received for the valuable final products.

So finance can extend so much money for each and expect that and an ad-
ditional amount back. -

If this occurs, so will expansion.

Finance comes unstuck when it fails to “cost”? an organization and fails to
support valuable final product production.

Finance must not only practice “income greater than outgo”’ for the org, it
must practice it for each part of the org as well.

Then solvency becomes real.
The greatest aberration of finance is that it seeks to save things into sol-
vency. The real losses in an org are the sums never made. These are the most

important losses for finance to concentrate upon.

An org that makes 500 pounds a week that should make 5000 pounds a week
in potential is losing the finance people 4500 pounds a week!

Finance can force production along certain lines by putting in funds and
getting more back.

Finance becomes too easily the management of an org but it only does that
when it ceases to deal in its own commodity—money.

An org which has executives unfamiliar with finance will fall at once into
the control of the finance people in the org. And these finance people, if they
don’t really know money, will fall at once under the control of outside finance
people.

One has to know finance in any organization anywhere, even in a socialism.
Sooner or later the books get balanced in any society.

10. JUSTICE
Without justice there can be no real organization.

Even a government owes its people an operating climate in which human
transactions and business can occur.

Where insane and criminal individuals operate unchecked in the community,
justice is uncertain and harsh.

The society in which the insane rise to positions of power becomes a nightmare.

278
Justice is a difficult subject. Man handles it badly.
Justice cannot occur until insanity can be detected and cured.

The whole task of justice is to defend the honest man. Therefore the target
of justice is the establishment of a sane society.

The inability to detect or cure the insane destroys civilizations.

Justice is an effort to bring equity and peace. When one cannot detect and
cure insanity then sooner or later justice actions will become unjust and be used
by the insane.

To us, justice is the action necessary to restrain the insane until they are
cured. After that it would be only an action of seeing fair play is done.

11. MORALE

When all factors balance up in an org and give the group a common direc-
tion and mutual viability, morale can be expected to be good.

When the Admin Scale and the ten elements described are out of balance (with-
out proper importance given to each) and when one or many of these (Admin
Scale and the elements herein described) are not in agreement one with another,
then morale will be poor.

Morale is not made of comfort and sloth. It is made of common purpose and
obstacles overcome by the group.

When the Admin Scale and these elements are not held together by similar
aims, then morale has to be held up artificially.

The most ghastly morale I have ever seen was amongst “the idle rich.”

And the highest morale I’ve ever seen was amongst a furiously dedicated,
common-purposed group working under fantastic stresses with very little against
almost hopeless odds.

I used to observe that morale in a combat unit would never materialize before
they had been through hell together.

All drama aside, morale is made up of high purpose and mutual confidence.
This comes from the Admin Scale items and these elements of organization being
well aligned, one with the next, and honest sane endeavor to achieve a final goal
for all.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

279
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 30 DECEMBER 1970

Remimeoa
SO Member Hat
Staff Member Hat

Personnel Series 15
Org Series 20

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL

The differences between a competent person and an incompetent person are
demonstrated in his environment (surroundings).

A person is either the effect of his environment or is able to have an effect
upon his environment.

The nineteenth-century psychologist preached that man had to “‘adjust to his
environment.” This false datum helped begin a racial degeneration.

The truth is that man is as successful as he adjusts the environment to him.

Being competent means the ability to control and operate the things in the
environment and the environment itself.

When you see things broken down around the mechanic who is responsible
for them, he is plainly exhibiting his incompetence—which means his inability to
control those things in his environment and adjust the environment for which he
is responsible— motors.

When you see the mate’s boats broken up, you know he does not have con-
trol of his environment.

Know-how, attention and the desire to be effective are all part of the ability
to control the environment.

One’s “standards” (the degree of rightness one is trying to establish and
maintain) are directly related to one’s desire to have a controlled environment.

The attainment of one’s standards is not done by criticism (a human system).
It is done by exerting control of one’s environment and moving things effectively
toward a more ideal scene.

Control of the environment begins with oneself—a good case state, a body
that one keeps clean and functioning. This extends to one’s own gear, his cloth-
ing, tools, equipment. It extends further to the things one is responsible for in the
environment. Then it extends out into the whole environment, the people and the
mest.

One can get pretty dirty fixing things up. That’s okay. But can one then also
clean oneself up?

280
The ability to confront mest is a high ability. After that comes the ability to
handle and control it.

The ability to confront people is also a high ability. After that comes the
ability to get along with them and to handle and contro] them.

There is the supreme test of a thetan—the ability to make things go right.
The reverse of this is the effort to make things go wrong.
Incompetence —lack of know-how, inability to control—makes things go wrong.

Given some know-how or picking it up by observation, sane people make things
go right.

The insane remain ignorant intentionally or acquire know-how and make things
go wrong.

Insane acts are not unintentional or done out of ignorance. They are inten-
tional; they are not “unknowing dramatizations.” So around insane people things
go wrong.

One cannot tell the difference really between the sane and insane by behav-
ior. One can tell the difference only by the product. The product of the sane is
survival. The product of the insane is an overt act. As this is often masked by
clever explanations, it is not given the attention it deserves. The pretended good
product of the insane turns out to be an overt act.

A large percentage of this planet’s population (undetermined at this time for the
“general public” but in excess of 20%) are insane. Their behavior looks passable.
But their product is an overt act. The popularity of war confirms this. The prod-
ucts of existing governments are mainly destructive. The final product of the
human race will be a destroyed planet (a contaminated air cover rendering the
planet unable to sustain life, whether by radiation or fumes).

Thus, due to the inability to detect and handle the insane, the sane majority
suffers.

The hidden actions of the insane can destroy faster than an environment can
be created UNLESS one has the know-how of the mind and life and the tech of
admin and the ability and know-how to handle mest.

An area or activity hit by an influx of new recruits or new customers tends to
unsettle. Its mest gets abuse, things go out of control.

Gradually, working to put in order, the standards are again being attained.
The minority insane get handled, the know-how of groups and orgs becomes
more generally known, the tech of mest gets used again.

AS an organization expands it goes through cycles of lowered condition and
raised condition. This is normal enough since by taking on more and more area
one is letting in more and more insane even though they are in a small propor-
tion to the sane.

281
Order is reestablished and survival trends resumed to the degree that the
sane begin to reach out and handle things around them and as the insane are
made sane.

Thus one gets downtrends and uptrends. As soon as a group begins to feel
cocky, it takes on more area. This includes more unhandled people, admin and
mest and a downtrend begins. Then the sane begin to handle and the insane
begin to be sane and the uptrend starts.

This is probably even the basis of national economic booms and depressions.

This is only bad to the degree that the insane are put in charge. As soon as
this happens the downtrend becomes permanent and cultural decay sets in.

A group expanding rapidly into a decadent culture is of course itself sub-
jected to the uptrend—downtrend cycles and has to take very special measures to
counteract the consequences of expansion in order to maintain any rate of
growth.

The individual member of a group can measure his own progress by in-
creased ability to handle himself, his post and environment and the degree of
improvement of the group itself because of his own work within it.

A group that is messing up its gear and environment worse than it did a
while ago and is not improving it of course has to be reorganized before it per-
ishes.

No group can sit back and expect its high brass to be the only ones to carry
the load. The group is composed of individual group members, not of high brass.

The survival of a group depends upon the ability of its individual members
to control their environment and to insist that the other group members also con-
trol theirs.

This is the stuff of which survival is made.

A sane group, knowing and using their technologies of handling men and
mest, cannot help but control their environment.

But this depends upon the individual group member being sane, able to con-
trol his mest and those around him and using the tech of life, the tech of admin,
the tech of specific types of activity.

Such a group inevitably inherits the culture and its guidance.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

282
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead. Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 JANUARY 1971

Remimeo

Personnel Series 17
Org Series 21

DUPLICATING FUNCTIONS

All you have to do to run out of personnel, finance and get no production is
to duplicate the same functions that give the same product in an org.

Take three orgs side by side under the same management. Only if each divi-
sion of each org had entirely different products would this be possible.

Now let’s do it wrong. Each of these three orgs has an HCO and full per-
sonnel duties. Each separately promotes. Each has its own finance office, each
has its production div producing the same products. Each has its own correction div
—the place in general would be very overmanned, yet each div would be under-
manned for its full functions. The product would be terrible if it existed at all.
Morale would be ghastly, inter-org collisions continual.

The right way would be to work out the different products and then assign
them to one or another of these orgs. One org would have to be the source org
that produced the other two. One org would have all the finance with liaison only
in the other two orgs. One org would have to hire, hat and train with only liaison in
the other two. The orgs would have org boards which had the function but under
it would be the note “Liaison with ___—~_~_—_,”” source org.

In the impatience and emotion of organizing one org tends to individuate and
establish a duplicate function because “it can’t get service.” This begins the
catastrophe. Now they’ll all begin to go broke while having men bulging out of
the windows.

In looking over potential insolvency, look over duplicate functions.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

283
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 25 JANUARY 1971

Remimeo

Org Series 22

SQUIRREL ADMIN

When a squirrel is given a circular wheel he will run in it “round and ‘round
and ’round. He gets nowhere.

When persons in an organization do not know organizing or their org board
or hats, they go ’round and ’round and ‘round and get nowhere.

There is no valuable production. There is no money.

When you have an organization that has no valuable production, you know
that the people there go ‘round and ‘round and ’round and get nowhere.

They are squirrel administrators.

STANDARD ADMIN

There are right ways to handle a group. This is the single fact which most
often escapes people attempting to handle groups.

Also, for every correct solution there can be an infinity of wrong solutions.

The right way is a narrow trail but strong. The wrong ways are broad but all
lead into a bog.

You could “fix” a radio by hitting it with a sledgehammer, putting a hand
grenade in it or throwing it out of a 155th-story window. The number of wrong
ways you could “fix” it would be infinite.

Or you could find out what was wrong with it and replace the part or prop-
erly correct it.

The difference between the wrong way and the right way is that the radio,
wrongly “solved,” doesn’t work. The radio correctly solved works.

So the test of the wrong way or the right way is whether or not the radio then
worked.

This is the basic test of all administrative solutions. DID THEY WORK?
When experienced persons, working from basic theory, have evolved a tech-

nique for handling a situation which routinely now handles that situation, we have
now a STANDARD ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION.

284
When that situation appears, we apply thar solution and the matter gets handled.
The test is, did the solution work?

Solutions that work and are therefore routinely used to handle the situation to
which they apply are then called STANDARD ADMIN.

A multitude of these correct solutions are used in STANDARD ORGANIZING.
The org board, the hats, comm lines, comm centers, comm baskets, despatch
forms, routing forms, inspection actions, promotion actions, central filing, customer
or visitor handling, selling, collecting income, paying bills, inventorying, doing
finance reports, handling raw materials, training persons to handle and properly
change materials, correcting or improving staff competence, correcting organiza-
tional form, inspecting, reviewing and handling failed products, handling contact-
ing and converting the publics, establishing and using field distributors and
salesmen, providing public services, maintaining contact with the original and
basic technology, handling rivals and opposition, and running the organization in
general all have standard actions.

Now, glancing over the above rough list, you see we have hit the high spots
of a 21 department, 7 division org bd.

Each is a standard solution to continuing and recurring problems.

Each contains numerous standard solutions to the recurring problems associ-
ated with them.

Underneath all this is basic theory and around it is survival and potential
SUCCESS.

USE OF STANDARD ACTIONS

The difference between a successfully viable organization with cheerful and
cared for staff and a limping scene is standard and squirrel administration.

If standard admin is successful then why is it sometimes not used?
First the data has to exist, be available and known.
Next the data has to be used.

At first glance this may seem so clear-cut that it cannot go wrong. But one
must look a bit further.

One is dealing with a variable called man. One is working in a world full of
noise and conflict.

Certain personalities do not want the group or the organization to succeed
(see HCOB 28 Nov. 70, PSYCHOSIS). This problem has been so great amongst
men that every historical culture—each one an organization—has died. About 10
to 20 percent of mankind, at a broad guess, fit into this category.

285
In this universe it is easier to destroy than to construct. Yet the survival of
life forms depends on construction.

To overcome this, man has developed technology and the cooperative effort
known as organization.

The forces of the physical universe can be channeled and used only with
technology.

The forces inherent in life forms can succeed only when channeled and
aligned with one another.

Therefore, to succeed, a group must have the technology it uses available
and known to it. And then use it.

From this one obtains the agreement and alignment necessary to generate the
group action and production which brings about success.

NONCONFRONT
When a group member has the data, the bar to his using it would be his own
disagreement with the group succeeding or, more frequently, his inability to con-
front things.
EXAMPLE: Two group members are quarreling. A third group member seeks
to handle it. Even though he knows the technique (third party law), his own inability
to confront people makes him fail to use the correct solution and he backs off.

In backing off he thinks of some nonconfront nonstandard “solution” such
as firing them.

He has become a squirrel administrator.

EXAMPLE: The plant machinery is in bad shape. It is deteriorating to such an
extent that it soon will cease to run. The mechanics plead for money to repair. The
plant manager unfortunately cannot confront machinery—he not only “doesn’t know
about it” but it frightens him. He does not financially plan its full repair on a gra-
dient back to an ideal scene. He simply dreams up the vague hope a new type will be
invented. He does nothing. The machinery now costs more to run than it produces.
The plant fails. The plant manager was a squirrel administrator.

So we have various causes of failure:

1. A secret desire to destroy.

2. The nonexistence of technology.

3. Nonavailability of the technology.

4. Ignorance of the technology even when available.

286
5. Failure to apply the technology even when available and known because
the being cannot or does not confront the people or the portions of the
physical universe concerned.

The existence of any of these things brings a group toward squirrel admin-
istration.

Natural cataclysms or political or social catastrophes or upheavals are the
other two points which can bring about a failure, but even these can be planned
for and to some degree handled. The future possibility of these must also be
confronted in order to be circumvented.

Any successful organization will be fought by the society’s fancied rulers or
enemies. This is something which should be taken in stride. The ability to con-
front these discloses that standard administrative actions exist for these two.

DRILLS

Thus an administrator or staff member, even when the group’s tech is avail-
able and known, must be able to confront and handle the confusions which can
occur and which invite a turn-away and a squirrel solution.

Even this situation of the inabilities to confront and handle can be solved by
third dynamic (group) drills and drills on the sixth dynamic (physical universe).

The drills would be practices in achieving general awareness and confronting
and handling the noise and confusions which make one oblivious of or which
drive one off and away from taking standard actions.

COMPETENCE
Competence is increased in the individual and the group by successes.
Successes come from anticipating the situation and handling it.
Standard admin is the key to competence and successes in an organization.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

287
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 16 FEBRUARY 197]

Remimeo Issue I]

Org Series 23

LINES AND TERMINALS

There is a scale concerning lines and terminals.

ASSOCIATED TERMINALS
Handling flows and correctly changing particles.

GROUPED TERMINALS

LINES

PARTICLES

SIGNIFICANCES

FALSE TERMINALS
MISDIRECTED LINES

WRONG PARTICLES

FALSE SIGNIFICANCES (RUMORS)
MYSTERIOUS TERMINALS
CHAOTIC LINES

MENACING PARTICLES
DANGEROUS IMPRESSIONS
NONEXISTENT TERMINALS
NONEXISTENT LINES
NONEXISTENT PARTICLES
UNCONSCIOUS IMPULSES

THE CHAOS OF UNHAPPY NOTHINGNESS

Any organization and any individual staff member thereof is somewhere on
this scale.

The trick of the scale is the awareness factor. At a position on the scale, the
being or org is NOT AWARE of the scale levels above him.

288
Thus an organization at “mysterious terminals” is unaware of “false signif-
icances” or anything else above “mysterious terminals.” Thus an org or individual
at “mysterious terminals” is unaware of any falsity or any oddity in significances
or ideas.

Any level is the effect of any level ABOVE IT.
Any level is slightly at cause over any level below it.

Thus a well-organized group is not at effect and can make an effect upon
any group below it in awareness on the scale.

CAUSES
There are several causes for lower positions on the scale.

The first cause is degree of personal aberration where a personne} is will-
fully throwing the terminals, lines, particles and significances into disarray. Show
me how he regards terminals, handles particles or routes and I will know how
sane or crazy he is. The significances given to terminals, handling particles and
lines is a direct index of sanity.

The second cause is unawareness. Drills on lines and terminals were once
thought to improve awareness. This is no longer held to be true. Drills have to be
done to BRING ABOUT awareness. People are not naturally aware of other peo-
ple, lines, various particles or ideas. Due to a century of psychological instruc-
tion from childhood that they are animals and after thousands of years of the
“upper classes” regarding them as such, people tend to favor a dangerously low
or nonexistent awareness. A sort of jurisprudence has been in effect that it is
safer to be unaware as then one is “not guilty.” A humanoid who has just run
over a child has a first response of “I didn’t see him.” This is highly nonsurvival.
If one never notices safes about to fall on him he is soon dead. And painfully so.
Unawareness is a sort of blindness where the person looks like he is looking but
sees nothing. Degrees of this exist. One can make a terrible lot of errors with
this. Mr. A appears to the observer to be noticing, smelling things and hearing
whereas he registers no sights, has a blind nose and tunes out all sound. “Did
you read it?”’ “Yes.” “What did it say?” And you hear a lot of things then that
weren't on the paper. There are even degrees of registry. A person appears to see
and yet doesn’t. A person appears to see and on being asked will say what he
saw but can be unaware of seeing, registering or saying he saw! This drives
teachers quite mad. One has the glib student who can parrot but cannot apply.
This is a surface registry without awareness. Thus drills such as the Admin Training
Drills or dummy runs on lines are needed to bring about awareness. A few very
sane fortunate fellows can see, register, understand and handle correctly without any
drills at all. Others need drills to bring about awareness below a superficial response.
To unaware people, terminals, lines, particles and significances just don’t exist.

The third general category is delusion. One sees A and believes it to be G.
This is a lower band of self-protection. Some workers (an awful lot of them) will
only take jobs which are mechanical “‘so they can daydream.” Their concept of a
terminal is an altered terminal. A line goes somewhere else. A particle is some-
thing else. And an idea is really another idea. Such people are incapable of du-
plication. Say “I see the cat,” they hear “Cars are dangerous.” They aren’t really
crazy. They just register alterations of what they perceive.

289
The person who can attain the state of awareness of terminals as they are,
lines as they should be, particles as they exist and significances that are the in-
tended significances are very valuable people. An ideal group can be made up of
such people.

CONSTRUCTIVE ACTIONS
An organization consists of terminals, lines, particles and significances.

An AGREEMENT factor has to be established and the group has to be
aware of it and use it.

This agreement factor would consist of:
1. Purposes of the group.

2. A list of the hats including a short statement of the purpose and function
of each post.

3. A full list of the particles handled by the group and the changes ex-
pected at each point of flow.

4. The flow lines of the particles being handled and changed.

5. The significances (technologies) of the group to form, flow and change
particles.

If an org officer does not compile these five things and make them fully
known and agreed to by all in the group, no organization will form or work.

Thus the PLAN of the group has to be laid out and drilled and known or no
organization will form.

One will just have a group of individuals colliding with each other with no
production.

The greatest source of confusion in a group are intermediate seniors who
knock hats off faster than they can be gotten on and lines out before they can
flow, all simply out of ignorance of the general plan of the organization.

Those who cannot perceive one or more of the above five points or bodies of
data have to be drilled into awareness of them and dummy run.

Those who are quite crazy will frantically fight the hatting, stringing of lines
and changing of particles and will inject mad significances into it all.

So the answer to how to make a group into an organization is to handle the
insane one, prepare the five layouts named above, drill and dummy run everyone
in the group on its entire pattern and expertly hat the specialist actions required
at each point of change.

Then one has an organization that can produce and be viable.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

290
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 6 MARCH 1971

Remimeo
Prod-Org Hats
Tech Hats
Qual Hats

Org Series 24

LINE DESIGN
HGC LINES, AN EXAMPLE

The present lines for the HGC in any org are the subject of HCOB 5 Mar.
71, C/S Series 25, THE FANTASTIC NEW HGC LINE, which is to be consid-
ered part of this policy letter.

This modifies early Tech org boards to some extent.

The old line in °65 policy did not include a Case Supervisor as such and
shunted failed pcs to Qual Review.

Today Tech does its own pc repairs and Qual concentrates on cramming
HGC auditors as well as students. Qual can also cram the Tech C/S.

It is completely amazing that a statistic ceiling on well done auditing hours de-
livered could not have exceeded 250-300 well done hours a week no matter how
many auditors were hired or posted. The post of the C/S overloaded and the D of P
post could not function well without overload.

The new line is capable of a statistic ceiling of 600 to 800 well done hours a
week. After that a new second HGC is manned fully and given new space.

The importance of a properly formed line, traveling in correct sequence is
then driven home.

An improper line will reduce the statistic ceiling by 2 to 4 of what can be
achieved by the same number of people.

The overload of seniors usually occurs because of improperly set up lines.

Lines are invisible to most people and they are unable to conceive of them
until given full drills.

Unless this new C/S line is used you will not be able to average more than
250 well done hours a week no matter how many auditors you put in the HGC.
The auditors will be idle, confused and causing upsets.

If an org cannot get more than 250 well done hours a week, it will find that
it cannot really make money from processing.

Thus the new line will give volume, quality and viability in processing pcs.

291
Advantages of the line are that one HSST can handle up to 30 auditors. The
earlier ceiling was 8 or 10 auditors.

With higher volume, backlogs vanish rapidly.
The admin personnel in the line can be afforded.
Line design, then, is a strong and unsuspected cause of low statistic ceilings.

Product and org officers must be intimately familiar with this HGC line.
And they must be aware of the fact that faulty line design can cripple an org’s
income and overload its posts and excellent line design can double the stat ceiling
in any department while lightening the load.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

292
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 16 MARCH 1971
Remimeo Issue IV

Org Series 25
Personnel Series 19

LINES AND HATS

It will be found that in organization there are MANY major factors involved.

The following three, however, give the most problems:

1. Personnel

2. Hats

3. Lines.

Technology is a subdivision of both personnel (who may have to be specialiy
trained before they can be considered personnel) and hats (which are mainly ad-
min technology and line functions).

To solve any problem, one has to recognize what the problem is. One cannot
solve problem A by trying to solve problem B or C. Example: Problem: broken-
down car. You cannot fix the car by repairing the kitchen lino. Example: You cannot
floor the kitchen by fixing the car.

All this may seem obvious when obviously stated. But there is a more subtle
version. ANY PROBLEM THAT DOES NOT SOLVE IS NOT THE PROBLEM.
There must be some other problem.

Locating and isolating situations (problems) in an organization is the tech-
nique of the Data Series. That technology will find for one the problem that
should be solved.

As there are three major organizational factors these then also form the core
of all organizational situations (or problems, same thing).

Each one of these is its own zone—personnel, hats, lines.

Each one has its own problems. There are situations in personnel. There are
situations in hats. There are situations in lines.

They are related. They are not identical.
You will find you cannot wholly solve a problem in lines by solving person-

nel. You cannot wholly solve a problem in hats by solving lines. You cannot
wholly solve a problem in personnel by solving the other two.

293
Example: Production hours are down. Fifteen new personnel are added to
the area. Production stays down. It was a problem in lines.

Example: Confusion reigns in the pipe shop. The lines are carefully straightened
out. Confusion still reigns. It was a problem in hats.

Example: Broken products are wrecking org repute. Hats are carefully put
on. Products continue to be broken. It was a problem in personnel.

Example: The org stays small. Executives work harder. The org stays small.
It was a series of problems in personnel, hats and lines, none addressed at all.

You will see symptoms of all this in various guises. The test of whether or
not the right problem was found is whether or not production increased in vol-
ume, quality and viability.

In actual practice one works on all three of these factors constantly—
personnel, hats and lines— when one is organizing.

You will find with some astonishment that failure to have or know or wear or
do a hat is the commonest reason why lines do not go in. That personnel is hard
to procure and train because hats and lines are being knocked out. That hats
can’t be worn because lines or personnel are out.

Situations get worsened by solving the wrong problem instead of the real
problem. In the Data Series this is called finding the right Why.

Organizational problems center around these three things in the broadest
general sense. More than one can be present in any situation.

Production problems are concerned with the particles which flow on the
lines, changed by the hatted personnel, with consumption and general viability.
So to make a full flow from organization through to distribution, one would add
raw materials, changed state of materials and their consumption. Organization is
not an end-all. To have value it must result in production.

But when personnel, hats and lines are not solved, production is very
difficult. Therefore to get production one must have an organization to back it
up. And personnel, hats and lines must exist and be functional. If these exist, the
rest of the factors of establishment can be brought into being.

It goes without saying that organization involves other problems like space,
materiel, finance, etc. These and many more also enter into “Whys” of no
production. But dominating others are problems in personnel, hats and lines.
Others tend to solve if these are handled and organized.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 25 MARCH 1971

Remimeo

Org Series 26

VALUABLE FINAL PRODUCTS

By definition, a valuable final product is something that can be exchanged
with other activities in return for support. The support usually adds up to food,
clothing, shelter, money, tolerance and cooperation (goodwill).

On an individual basis this is easy to grasp. The individual produces a prod-
uct or products which, flowed into the dept, div, org, company, community, state,
nation or planet, then returns to him his pay and goodwill or at least sufficient
goodwill to prevent his abandonment or destruction.

Long-range survival of the individual is attained in this fashion.

A valuable final product (VFP) is valuable because it is potentially or factually
exchangeable.

The key word in this sense is EXCHANGEABLE. And exchangeability
means outside, with something outside the person or activity.

A valuable final product could as easily be named a VALUABLE EX-
CHANGEABLE PRODUCT.

Sanity and insanity are matters of motive, not rationality or competence. The
sane are constructive, the insane are destructive.

Thus insanity on the part of the potential receiver of a VFP can prevent an
exchange of a final product the receiver should be able to use and for which he
should be willing to give active support and goodwill to the producer. Example:
Man starving; you try to sell him good food at reasonable price for which he has
money to pay. He tries to shoot you and destroy the food. This is insanity since
he is trying to destroy the product he needs and can afford.

Crime is the action of the insane or the action of attempting seizure of prod-
uct without support. Example: Robbers who do not support a community seek to
rob from it supporting funds.

Fraud is the attempt to obtain support without furnishing a product.

Sanity and honesty then consist of producing a valuable final product for

which one is then recompensed by support and goodwill, or in reverse flow,
supporting and giving goodwill to the producer of the product.

295
Ethical basics, morale, social subjects, law, all are based on this principle of
the valuable final product. Previously it has been “instinctive” or “common
sense.” It has not before been stated.

Civilizations which facilitate production and interchange and inhibit crime
and fraud are then successful. Those that do not, perish.

Persons who wish to destroy civilizations promote departures from these bas-
ic rules of the game. Methods of corrupting fair interchange are numerous.

The FACTORS are the first appearance of these principles.

The theory of the valuable final product is an extension of the FACTORS.

Parts of organizations or organizations, towns, states and countries all follow
the principles which apply to the individual.

The survival or value of any section, department, division or org is whether
or not it follows these principles of interchange.

The survival or value of any town, state or country follows these principles
of interchange.

You can predict the survival of any activity by confirming its interchange
regularities or can predict its downfall by irregularities in this interchange.

Therefore it is vital that a person or a section, department, division or part
of an org or an org figure out exactly what it is interchanging. It is producing
something that 1s valuable to the activity or activities with which it is in commu-
nication and for that it is obtaining support.

If it is actually producing valuable final products, then it is entitled to support.
If on the other hand it is only organizing or hoping or PRing and is not
producing an interchangeable commodity or commodities in VOLUME or QUAL-
ITY for which support can be elicited and even demanded, it will not be VIABLE.
It doesn’t matter how many orders are issued or how well org boards are
drawn or beautiful the plans to produce are made. The hard fact of production

remains the dominant fact.

How well organized things are increases production volume and improves
quality and thus can bring about viability.

But it is the valuable final product there and being interchanged that deter-
mines basic survival.

Lack of viability can always be traced to the volume and quality of an actual
valuable final product.

296
Hope of a product has a short-term value that permits an activity to be built.
But when the hope does not materialize, then any hoped-for viability also collapses.

One then must organize back from the actually produced product.

For instance, a technical subject is capable of producing an exact result.

IF persons are trained to actually produce the result AND THE RESULT IS
PRODUCED, then one can exchange the technicians with the community for
support.

If the result is produced (by training the technicians well), then the result can
be interchanged with an individual for support and goodwill.

Where any of these factors suffer in volume or quality, then an interchange is
difficult and viability becomes uncertain.

As individuals, communities and states are not necessarily sane, upsets can
occur in the interchange even when production is occurring.

Therefore the producer has a stake in maintaining the sanity of the scene in
which he is operating, and one of his valuable final products is a scene in which
production and interchange can occur.

The basics of valuable final products are true for any industrial or political
or economic system.

Many systems attempt to avoid these basics and the end result would be disaster.
The individual, section, department, division, org or country that is not pro-

ducing something valuable enough to interchange will not be supported for long.
It is as simple as that.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

297
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 7 JULY 1971

Remimeo

HASes Star-rate

FEBC Grads
Star-rate

FEBC Checksheet
Star-rate

Org Series 27

HCO ESTABLISHMENT FUNCTIONS

HCO means HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE.

The elementary and very simple actions of HCO are contained in this:

It is really hCo.

C = Communications.

To have Communications you have to have TERMINALS.

Flows can ONLY occur when terminals are rock steady and STABLE. There
can be NO flows and NO power without steady terminals. Hence, comm cannot
occur without stable terminals.

The ORG BOARD is the pattern of the terminals and their flows. So you
have to have an org bd. And the org bd must in truth be a representation of what

is in the org.

The org bd shows where what terminals are located in the org so flows can
occur.

HCO has recruitment which means it gets people from OUTSIDE the org to
be placed as terminals in the org = posts.

HCO has the posting of the org bd and designating the spaces in the org so
that flows can occur.

Hatting is a prime function of HCO because otherwise the terminals won’t
know what they are supposed to be doing or what flows they handle or how.

HCO has INSPECTION to see that the flows are going right and that termi-
nals are functioning.

Ethics exists to handle gross outnesses in flows.
Then routing can occur.
Then production can occur.

In essence that is ALL there is to an HCO.

298
If it realizes its key is C for Communications and that comm requires termi-
nals and an org bd so that flows can occur then HCO will function.

This action of putting in terminals is called ESTABLISHING.

Thus HCO is the establishing division.

DIS-ESTABLISHING

If HCO does not know this and if it makes numerous errors or alters impor-
tances away from this, it DIS-ESTABLISHES the org.

DIS = Take apart.

ESTABLISH = Put there.

DISESTABLISH = Take apart what is put there.

Thus disestablish means to take out terminals and tear things up.

In using the org itself as a source of personnel, then an “HCO” tears things
up far faster than it puts things there.

HAS

The HCO Area Secretary, HAS, has the function of ESTABLISHING THE
ORG.

That means to find, hat, train, apprentice persons from OUTSIDE the org,
to locate them in the org and on the org bd and then route the raw materials
(public people in this case) along the line for production, which means changing
particles into a final product.

If HCO establishes the org then all will be well.

If it fails to recruit or hat or org bd or route or distribute comm or police the
lines, the org will stagger or fail.

The HAS is responsible for seeing that HCO establishes the org.
An HAS who is doing anything else is DIS-ESTABLISHING.

HCO EXTERNAL
HCO has the incoming and outgoing flow lines as well.

This gives it Address. This means the /Jocation of the terminals OUTSIDE
the org that the org contacts.

This in itself is an org bd.
The HAS must insist that the outside terminals are also established.

This gives an international network of flows amongst terminals.

299
WHAT is produced and WHAT flows on the lines is the business of other
terminals outside HCO unless these threaten the functions of HCO.

SIMPLICITY
Now if you think there is anything more to it than this. work and work and
work to do it in clay, clean up the misunderstood words and become thus able to
envision and handle it.
Many policies exist about HCO. There is a lot of admin tech connected with
an HCO but ALL OF IT is entirely and completely concerned with how to es-
tablish an HCO and an org.

This PL should be known, known, known and any further confusion would
be plainly the result of personal aberration such as an inability to conceive of a
terminal or a space or a thirst for confusion only found in very batty places.

The functions of an HCO and the duties of an HAS are so elementary and
so plain that they cannot be misunderstood even by experts.

HCO establishes the org.

That is the basic thing to know.

The techniques of how it is done are well recorded and broadly issued.
HCO does NOT disestablish the org.

HCO does NOT leave an org unestablished.

HCO ESTABLISHES THE ORG.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

300
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 JULY 1971

Remimeo Issue I

Org Series 28
Personnel Series 2]

WHY HATTING?

A few days ago when I found that musical chairs and flubbed hatting had
unstabilized some areas, I wondered whether or not this might stem from some
social aberration that was very general in the societies in which we are working.

And it seems to have been the case. I worked on it a bit and found this:

LAW: THE POWER OF A THETAN STEMS FROM HIS ABILITY TO
HOLD A POSITION IN SPACE.

This is quite true. In Scientology 8-80 the base of the motor is discussed. It
holds two terminals in fixed positions. Because they are so fixed, power can be
generated.

If a thetan can hold a position or location in space he can generate POWER.
If he cannot, he cannot generate power and will be weak.
We have known this for nineteen years. It applies here.

Observation: MODERN SOCIETY TENDS TO CONFUSE AND UNSTA-
BILIZE PERSONS WITH ITS HECTIC PACE.

Observation: BEINGS WHO ARE AFRAID OF STRONG PEOPLE TRY
TO WEAKEN THEM.

Observation: PERSONS WHO ARE PUSHED AROUND FEEL THEY CAN-
NOT HOLD A POSITION IN SPACE.

Observation: PEOPLE HATE TO LOSE THEIR POSTS AND JOBS. THEY
FIND IT DEGRADING.

In processing, picking up this chain of lost positions achieves very good
gains and rehabilitates a person’s ability to hold a job.

LAW: BY GIVING A PERSON A POST OR POSITION, HE IS SOME-
WHAT STRENGTHENED AND MADE MORE CONFIDENT IN
LIFE.

LAW: BY LETTING A PERSON RETAIN HIS POST, HE IS MADE
MORE SECURE.

301
LAW: BY HATTING A PERSON, HE IS GREATLY STRENGTHENED
AS HE IS HELPED TO HOLD HIS POST.

A basically insecure person who feels he is unable to hold his position in
space is sufficiently strengthened by hatting to feel secure enough to do his job.

LAW: HAVING A HAT, BEING HATTED AND DEMONSTRATING COM-
PETENCE MAKES A PERSON FEEL CAPABLE OF HOLDING
HIS POSITION IN SPACE AND HE BECOMES MORE STABLE,
CONFIDENT IN LIFE AND MORE POWERFUL.

LAW: UNHATTED PERSONS ON A POST CAN BECOME CRIMINAL
ON THE POST BECAUSE THEY FEEL INSECURE AND BE-
COME WEAK.

When a person is secretly afraid of others, he instinctively will not hat them
or hats them wrongly and tends to transfer or move them about.

When a person is insecurely posted and insufficiently hatted, he can try to
weaken others by trying to prevent their hatting and trying to get them trans-
ferred or even dismissed.

This is apparently the social aberration at work.

The answer to a sane org and a sane society is not welfare and removal. It is:

Recruit them

Train them

Hat them

Apprentice them

Give them a post.

This is so strong in truth it would de-aberrate the bulk of the crime out of a
society.

And it sure will put an org in POWER.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

302
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 11 AUGUST 1971
Remimeo Issue III

Org Series 29

INFINITE EXPANSION

There is no reason whatever to ever contract or reduce the size of an org
except covert destruction.

In theory there is no limit to the size of an org.
The 1967 org board is capable of expanding to 200,000 staff members!
For our purposes, there is no real limit to expansion.

So long as property purchase does not commit future income dangerously
and so long as HASes keep the admin staff in a ratio of two to one technical
staff, there is no limit to expansion.

So long as cash-bills is kept more cash than bills there is no limit to expansion.

So long as the staff produces what their posts call for there is no limit to
expansion.

So long as you DELIVER in quality what you SELL there is no limit to
expansion.

So long as you keep standard on admin and keep standard on tech, there is
no limit to expansion.

So don’t get frightened, don’t fire people, don’t cut back. Understand the
above and the whole of this policy letter. And there is no limit to expansion.

So EXPAND.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

303
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 JULY 1972
Remimeo Issue II

Establishment Officer Series 22
Executive Series 14
Org Series 30

ESTO FAILURES

For several months I have been studying the Esto system in operation and
have finally isolated the exact points of any failures so they can be turned to
SUCCESSES.

PUTTING IN THE SYSTEM
An Esto returning to an org can crash it.
The exact reasons for this are:

A. The execs who heretofore did organizational work say, “Ah, here’s the
Esto system at last,” and promptly drop their organizational and person-
nel actions.

Yet here is this lone E Esto, no divisional Estos, no one trained to support him.

The right answer is when an E Esto goes into an org where there are no
Estos or only a TEO or QEO, he must gather up the execs and tell them it will
take him weeks to recruit and train Estos and that THEY MUST CONTINUE
ANY ORGANIZATIONAL ACTIONS THEY ARE DOING and that the HAS
IS STILL ESTABLISHING THE ORG.

Otherwise they let go their lines.

B. The new E Esto takes key production personnel from the divisions to be
Estos and they crash.

The answer to this is to RECRUIT the new Estos.
This is easier than it looks if you recruit idle area auditors to be Estos.

If you do this, remember that they went idle as auditors because they had
out-ethics, were PTS, had misunderstoods and out-TR 0. To get them you do a 3
May 72 (ETHICS AND EXECUTIVES) PL, a 5 Apr. 72 (PTS TYPE A HAN-
DLING) PL,” Method 4 on their courses and make them do real TRs, especially
zero. And they’ll be ready.

*[Editor’s Note: HCO PL 5 Apr. 72, PTS TYPE A HANDLING, has since been cancelled and replaced
by HCO PL 20 Oct. 81R. Rev. !0 Sept. 83. same title.]

304
You get a list of area auditors and contact them and do the above on them
and you’ll have Estos who are half-trained already.

Failing this or in addition to it just plain recruit.
C. The first post a new E Esto should take is Dept 1.

He does NOT “hat the HAS” or “just do programs.” He rolls up his sleeves
and WORKS as director of Dept 1.

He recruits, he posts up Dept 1. He hats the hell out of Dept 1.

He makes a Department | that really, really flows in personnel, puts up org
boards and hats.

WHEN he has a Department | FUNCTIONING he can begin to recruit Es-
tos as well as other org staff.

If he can’t get a Dept | whizzing he has no business being an Esto, does he?

He does NOT put in Dept 2 or act as Dept 3. He makes the HAS handle
these.

With a strong, working Dept !, an Esto system can then go in.
D. Musical] chairs is the commonest reason any org collapses.
A “new broom sweeps clean” complex will wreck any org.

An E Esto on arrival, taking over Dept 1, FREEZES ALL PERSONNEL
TRANSFERS. He does not permit even one transfer.

The only exception would be where a musical chair insanity has just oc-
curred. If this was followed by a stat crash then one REVERTS THE ORG TO
THE UPSTAT PERIOD and then FREEZES PERSONNEL TRANSFERS.

But before one reverts one must evaluate the earlier period by stats to be sure
it WAS the upstat period.

By freezing personnel one protects what he is building.

Almost all musical-chairing is the work of a suppressive except when it is
the work of an idiot.

E. Anyone trying to hold Dept | in a personnel-starved org is holding a hot
seat as any HAS or Personnel Director can tell you.

Body traffic to this dept in any medium-sized org defies belief.
It looks like Grand Central Station at the rush hour.

“T have to have ______————«,””_ ““Where is my Course Super sé?”
etc., etc., etc., 1s the constant chant.

You can spend the whole day interviewing staff execs and get nothing done.

There is a right way to do all these things and a billion wrong ways.

305
Obviously the answer to all their problems is to get and train new people.
Yet how can one in all the commotion?

Ninety percent of these requests are from people who are not hatting and
using the people they already have.

The right way is on any new personnel demanded one gets Dept 3 to do an
Inspection and Report Form for people in the area of the exec doing the demand-
ing. You will find very often unhatted, untrained and wasted personnel and many
outnesses.

You hold the line on personnel by saying: “Handle these unutilized or half-
working staff or these outnesses. You are here on my procurement board as en-
titled to the (give priority, 3rd, 8th) person we hire or recruit.”

And get industrious in recruiting using all standard actions, for that is the
only way things can be solved.

Most orgs would run better on less people because the personnel are not
hatted or trained. One org, two years before this writing, made four times as
much money on half the personnel it now has.

Unhatted, the staff is slow and uncertain. Unproducing, the div heads de-
mand little.

But they sure can scream for more personnel!

No org ever believes it is overmanned.

F. Some divisions (like the usual Treasury or Dissem) can be under-
manned. Key income posts most often are empty.

When one mans up an org one sets priorities of who gets personnel.

This is done by PRODUCTION paralleling. One mans up against production.

New people come in through Div 6. They are signed up by Div 2. Delivery
is done by Div 4. Money is collected by Div 3. That gives you a sequence of
manning up.

You man income and delivery posts with new hirings.

The E Esto is trying to get in a Dept | so of course he gives this a priority
as well.

Until the income is really rolling in and the delivery rolling out, one does
very little about other areas.

Having gained VOLUME, one now begins to man up for quality. This means
a Cramming and a WC Section in Qual. It means more HCO.

One now hits for future quantity by getting auditors in training, more upper
execs in training.

306
When the org is so built and running and viable it is time the whole Esto
system got manned up.

G. Every 5th person hired on an average should be put in Dept 1 as a Dept
J extra personnel who does Dept | duties and trains part time as an
Esto.

This gives the E Esto additional personnel in Dept 1.

It also begins an Esto right.

His most essential duties as an Esto are Dept 1 type duties.

You eventually have a bulging Dept 1. You have a basic Dept 1 that functions

well and will continue so. You have the Esto trainees who are working in Dept 1

as Dept | personnel. And you have of course some new people who are HCO
Expeditors until they get in enough basics for real regular posting.

This makes a fat Dept 1 and proves one can Esto!

SUCCESS

If an E Esto introduces the Esto system exactly as above and in no other way,
he will be a success.

Like an auditor varying processes or altering HCOBs, a new E Esto who
varies the above will bring about disaster.

Where E Estos have gone into orgs other ways or where the system has been
varied, stats have crashed.

By going in this way, as above, it can be a wild success.

How fast can you put in an Esto system? It takes months of hard work. It
depends really on how good the E Esto is at recruiting, org boarding and hatting.

If he’s good at these things the time does not stretch out to forever.

For comparison, it took half a year each to build DC, Johannesburg and SH
to their highest peaks. They were all built from a Dept 1 viewpoint of recruiting,
org boarding and hatting hard enough to get production.

So this is the oldest pattern we have—Dept | evolves the org.

When the org gets too big Dept 1 loses touch. You extend it into each div

and you have the Esto system. And you have Estos.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

307
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 23 JULY 1972RB
Remimeo REVISED 11 JANUARY 1991

Establishment Officer Series 23RB
Executive Series 15RB
Org Series 31RB

THE VITAL NECESSITY OF HATTING

On a graph analysis of past stats, my campaign on hatting where a hat was a
checksheet and pack apparently introduced a steady rise of the International
Gross Income.

Studying this further I discovered a new basic, simple fact:

HATTING = CONTROL.

A person who is hatted can control his post.

If he can control his post he can hold his position in space—in short, his
location. And this is power.

When a person is uncertain, he cannot control his post, he cannot control his
position. He feels weak. He goes slow.

If he can control his post and its actions he feels confident. He can work
effectively and rapidly.

The key is CONTROL.
Control is the ability to START, CHANGE and STOP.

When he is hatted he knows the tech of HANDLING things. Thus he can
control them. He is at CAUSE over his area.

If you have an org composed only of weak wobbly posts, they tend to col-
lapse in on each other. There is no POWER.

The org then cannot be CAUSE over its environment because it is composed
of parts which are not cause. The whole is only the sum of its parts.

If all the parts are each one at cause, then the whole will be at CAUSE over
its environment.

Only an org at CAUSE can reach and CONTROL.

308
Thus a fully hatted org can be at cause over its environment, can reach and

control its fates and fortunes.

&. Ww NN

ao nN BO

the

THUS THE PRIMARY TARGETS OF AN ESTO ARE:
A. ESTABLISHED ORG FORM and
B. FULLY HATTED PERSONNEL.

BASIC SEQUENCE OF HATTING

. Recruited or hired. Signs contract.
. Instant-hatted for the job assigned as an HCO Expeditor.
. Staff Status 0.

. Basic Study Manual (if the staff member has not previously done the Student

Hat or Primary Rundown).

. Staff Status I.

. Staff Status II.

. Posting as other than an HCO Expeditor.

. Full hatting with a checksheet and pack fully done with M6, M7, M9, M3

and M4 Word Clearing.

. Eligibility for study and auditing (OR for staff service or study).
. Must have a stat and demonstrated he has produced on post.

. Purification Rundown.

. Objective Processes: CCHs, 8-C, SCS, Havingness, etc.

. Scientology Drug Rundown (if required).

. Method One Word Clearing, Student Hat.

. Administrative or tech training (OEC or auditing).

Flag Orders in the Sea Org may change this lineup slightly but it is basically
same.

No one should have any other training, much less full-time training, before

step 12 in the above.

After a staff member has completed Staff Status 0 he may receive PTS han-

dlings and study the PTS checksheet and may have emergency assists. He may
also be audited by students and TTC if he has rising stats.

There are time limits placed on how long it takes to do SS I and SS II. A

person who can’t make it is routed to Qual where he is offloaded with advice on
how to get more employable. (In the SO it is Fitness Board.)

309
TIME-TESTED
The above is the route that has been tested by time and found good.
Other approaches have NOT worked.
Granting full-time training at once is folly. The person may get trained but
he’ll never be a staff member. This is the biggest failure with auditors—they
don’t know the org. Admin training with no org experience to relate it to is a

waste of time.

This was how we built every great org. And when it dropped out the org
became far less powerful.

Old-timers talk of these great orgs in their great days. And they will tell you
all about the org boarding and hatting that went on. How the Hatting Officer in
HCO and the Staff Training Officer in Qual worked as a team. And how fast the
lines flew.

The above steps have stood the test of time and are proven by stats.

RECRUITING AND HIRING

You never recruit with a promise of free courses or free auditing. Not even
HASes or HQSes. You recruit or hire somebody to be part of the team.

OPEN GATE

If any opinion or selection is permitted as to who is going to be let on staff,
all recruitment and hiring will fail.

By actual stats when you let anyone say, “No! Not him! Not her!”’ the gate
shuts, the flow stops. And you’ve had it.

Requirements and eligibility fail. The proof is that when they have existed in
orgs, the org wound up with only PTSes and no-case-gains!

The right answer is FAST FLOW hiring. Then you have so many that those
who can’t make it drift low on the org board or off. You aren’t trying to hold
posts with unqualified people “who can’t be spared.”

In a short-staffed org “looking only for the best people” the guy nobody will
have gets put in an empty “unimportant” department. He’s now a Director!

It only happened because you didn’t have dozens.

The answer is NOT lock the gate or have requirements. The answer is HAT.
An org that isn’t hatted goes weak and criminal.

Don’t be selective in hiring or recruiting. Open the gates and HAT!
Follow the steps given above and you have it.

Don’t spend coins like training or auditing (or travel) on people until they
have proven their worth. No bonuses or high pay for anyone until they have

310
reached and attained step 10 (a good stat). The cost of such fast flow hiring is
not then a big factor.

The only trouble I ever had with this was getting div heads to UTILIZE their
staff. A FIRST JOB FOR AN EXECUTIVE IS TO GET THINGS FOR HIS
PEOPLE TO DO. AND KEEP THEM BUSY AT PRODUCTIVE THINGS.

So I used to have to go through the org that did FAST FLOW HIRING
regularly and get people to use their new people. And to move off those who
could not work.

This was ALL the trouble I had with the system.

And until I enforced FAST FLOW HIRING there was always some effort by
someone to close the gate.

ALL the great executives in Scientology came up in such orgs.
With a flow of people the best move on up. The worst, if any, drop off.

Only orgs with restricted hiring or recruiting give trouble. IN A FAST
FLOW HIRING ORG THE HAS AND ESTOs MUST BE ON THE BALL. THE
BREAK DOWN OCCURS WHEN THEY DO NOT HAT AND KEEP ON TOP
OF THE PERSONNEL SCENE.

Fast flow hiring only breaks down and gets protested where HCO and Estos
are not doing a top job. They have to really handle the personnel, post them, hat
them, keep the form of the org.

A fully formed org in a heavily populated location would need hundreds of
staff. It would make hundreds of thousands.

But only if it is fast flow hiring, hatting, holding the form of the org, and
only then could it produce.
L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
Revision assisted by

LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

31]
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 28 JULY 1972

Remimeo

Establishment Officer Series 26
Executive Series 16
Org Series 32

ESTABLISHING
HOLDING THE FORM OF THE ORG

If a person who could not play a piano sat down at a piano and hit random
keys, he would not get any harmony. He would get noise.

If the head of a division gave orders to his staff without any regard to their
assigned posts or duties, the result would be confusion and noise.

That’s why we say a division head “doesn’t know how to play the piano”
when he knows so little about org form that he continually violates it by giving
his various staff members duties that do not match their hats or posts.

But even if one could play the piano, one would have to have a piano to play.

SPECIALISTS

Each org staff member is a specialist in one or more similar functions. These
are his specialties.

If he is fully trained to do these he is said to be HATTED.

The combined specialties properly placed and being done add up to the full
production of an org.

The org form is then the lines and actions and spaces and flows worked out
and controlled by specialists in each individual function.

These specialists are grouped in departments which have certain actions in
common.

The departments having similar functions are grouped into divisions.
The divisions combine into the whole org form.
It is far less complex than it looks. It would be very complicated and confusing

if there weren’t divisions and departments and specialized actions. Without these
you would get noise and very limited production and income, and at great strain.

312
Take a theater as an example. There are people who advertise it; these are
the public relations people; they are hatted to get publicity and make people want
to come to the play; call them the PR Division. There are the producers and
directors; they are hatted to present a performance and make it occur; call them the
Production Division. There are the actors and musicians; call them the Artists Divi-
sion. There are the property men; they are hatted to get costumes and items needed;
call them the Property Division. There are the stagehands and electricians and cur-
tain and set men; call them the Stage Division. There are the ticket sellers and
money handlers and payroll and bills payers; they are hatted on money and sell-
ing; call them the Finance Division. There are the people who clean the theater
and show people to seats and handle the crowds; call them the House Division.
And there are the managers and playwrights and score writers and angels (finan-
ciers); call them loosely the Executive Division.

Now as long as they know their org board, have their flows plotted out, are
hatted for their jobs and do a good job, even a half-good play can be viable.

But throw away the org board, skip the flows, don’t hat them and even a
brilliant script and marvelous music will play to an empty house and go broke.

Why? Because an org form is not held. Possibly an untrained unhatted producer
will try to make the stagehands sell tickets, the actors write the music, the financiers
show people to their seats. If he didn’t know who the people were or what their
hats were he might do just that.

And there would be noise and confusion even where there was no protest.
People would get in one another’s road. And the general presentation would look
so ragged to the public they’d stay away in droves.

ESTO ACTION

Now what would an Esto (or an Executive Director) have to do with, let us
say, an amateur, dilettante theatrical company that was about to bog.

Probably half the people had quit already. And even if there were people in
the company they would probably need more.

The very first action would be to Esto Series 16 the top men to make money
quick.

The first organizing action would be to kick open the hiring door. This
would begin with getting out hiring PR and putting someone there to sign people
up who came to be hired (not to test and audition and look at references, but just
to sign people up).

The next action would be to do a flow plan of public bodies and money. So
one sees where the org form reaches. Then a schedule.

The next action would be to do an org board. Not a 3-week job. (It takes me
a couple hours to sketch one with a sign pen for posting.) AND GET IT
POSTED.

One then takes the head of each of these divisions and hats him on what his
division is supposed to do and tell him to do it. NOW.

313
You make and post the flow plan, org bd and terminal location plan where
the whole company can see them.

Chinese drill on a flow plan to show them what they’re doing and what has
to be done.

Chinese drill on the org board including introducing each person named on it
and getting it drilled, what he does and who he is.

You Chinese drill the terminal locations where each of these persons (and
functions) is to be found.

You get agreement on schedules.

You now have a group that knows who specializes in what and what’s ex-
pected of each.

You get the head of the whole company to work with and hat the heads of
his divisions.

Now you get the heads of divisions to hat their own staffs while you help.
And you get them busy.

You then put the polishing touches on your own Dept | (personnel PR, per-
sonnel hiring, personnel placement, org bds, hat compilations, hat library and
hatting, hatting, hatting).

And by hatting and insisting on each doing his specialized job and getting
seniors to HOLD THE FORM OF THE ORG by ordering the right orders to the
right specialists and targeting their production and MAGIC! This amateur theatrical
company gets solvent and good enough to wind up on Broadway. It’s gone pro-
fessional!

You say, yes, but what about artistic quality? What about the tech of writing
music and acting . .

Hey, you overlooked the first action. You kicked the door open on hiring and
you hatted and trained. And you let go those who couldn’t get a stat.

Eventually you would meet human reaction and emotion and would put in a
full HCO and a full Qual particularly Cramming. But you’d still do that just to
be sure it kept going.

Yessir, it can’t help but become a professional group IF you, the Esto, es-
tablished and made them HOLD THE FORM OF THE ORG and produce while
they did it.

An Executive Director can do all this and produce too. The great ones do
things like this. But here it is in full view.

A Scientology org goes together just like that. Which could be why, when we
want to get something started, we say:

314
““Get the show on the road!”
But there is no show until it is established and the FORM OF THE ORG is held.

You are luckier than the amateur theatrical company’s Esto. You have policy
for every post and a book of it for every division and all the tech besides.

So there is no valid reason under the sun you cannot establish and then hold
the form of the org.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

315
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 13 JULY 1974

Remimeo Issue I

Org Series 33

PRODUCTION BUGS

An analysis of failures to produce in several fields showed this fault:

EXPERIMENTING ON A
STANDARD PRODUCTION LINE.

Example: A cook can cook 30 dishes of various types successfully. Instead
of retaining these as they are and seeking on the side to create or find new
dishes, the cook experiments with and changes her 30 standard dishes. The result
is failed production.

Example: A musical group has 15 finished pieces of repertoire. Instead of
developing totally new pieces, they rewrite their existing repertoire. The result is
a failure to do good shows.

Example: An org is doing well with a standard CF letter writing campaign.
This personnel is pulled off onto phones only as an experiment. The org stats
crash. The correct action would be a pilot phone program using new personnel
and leaving the standard actions in.

In all cases the right thing to do is maintain without variation the standard
production line and if experimenting or change is to be done: pilot it on the side
with people or actions that do NOT impede standard production.

There is always a better model in the research lab than there is on the
production line. The only bug occurs when the incomplete and unknown model is
shoved over as the standard production.

If on test and experience a new action, properly piloted, is better, then and
only then is it added to the standard line.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

316
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 13 JULY 1974
Remimeo Issue II

Org Series 34

WORKING INSTALLATIONS

Never unmock (take down or destroy) working installations.

A working installation is something that is operational.

The most flagrant violation of this is tearing up Div A to create Div B.
Division A is working. Somebody orders Division B to be strengthened.

A stupid or suppressive personnel person will tear up Div A to get personnel
for Div B.

The correct action is to find extra or new people for the new action.

MUSICAL CHAIRS (transfers of persons around an org) is THE SINGLE
MOST DESTRUCTIVE ACTION TO AN ORG’S STATS.

A failure to recruit and train new people leads one toward the destruction of
working installations.

Whenever a new unit has to be made up, the failure to recruit and train
shows up vividly. Essential people are ripped off their posts to form the new unit
and the destruction of working installations by this action shows up at once in
production stats.

It takes a great deal of work to find, hat and post people and get them experi-
enced enough to produce. It takes a lot of work to make a working installation.
But in one swoop some irresponsible personnel transfer can destroy it.

In mechanical matters the same thing applies. It takes a lot of work to make
something operational. If for a while it is not used, a mechanic may rob its parts
to set up something else instead of getting new parts for the something else. Then
when the working installation is needed, it doesn’t function and a great deal of
trouble and expense is put in setting it up again. The trouble and expense is far
more costly than getting the parts elsewhere.

NEVER UNMOCK A WORKING INSTALLATION.

It will be far more costly than going to a lot of trouble and expense to get
the people or parts elsewhere.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

317
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 20 SEPTEMBER 1976

Remimeo
Al) Staffs

Org Series 35
Executive Series 17

THE STAT PUSH

WHAT exactly is a stat push?

The danger in talking about this subject at all is that someone can do an
immediate make-wrong by saying, “This means don’t try to raise any stats.”

So to understand this subject at all, one must have a pretty clear idea of
exactly what is meant by “Don’t push stats.”

First of all one has to know precisely that STATISTICS ARE AN INDICA-
TOR; THEY ARE NOT AN OBJECT.

WHEN YOU PUSH THE INDICATOR, YOU DO NOT OBTAIN THE OB-
JECT IT REPRESENTS.

PRODUCTION IS COMPLETED CYCLES OF ACTION, NOT JUST
NUMBERS.

The figure “1” in “1 apple” is not the apple.
Therefore pure, raw, naked stat pushing is an outpoint called “wrong target.”

Pushing a stat without doing anything to bring about the stat is therefore an
aberration.

Demanding a stat without doing anything to see that it occurs or putting
anything there to make it or correcting anything that is preventing it is an aber-
ration built out of either psychosis or ignorance of what should really be done.

It is quite true that stats must be kept up. But unless they are kept up by
putting something there or correcting something that is there and getting all the
cycles of action done by all those who should do them, the stats will DECREASE
and eventually vanish.

An order, a telex, a yell to the effect “GET THE STATS UP” is so much
wasted time.

Further, such an order or telex or yell in any form has a very deteriorating
effect. Individuals or staffs look at it in a properly weird light. They are there,
they are doing what they can, they have problems and tangles and barriers. And
telling them to “Get the stats up” causes various reactions, none of them very

318
good. Essentially, it gives them neither help nor direction and even subtly in-
forms them that the person ordering either does not know or does not care what
is going on and is not about to help. The eventual reaction can become an ig-
noring of that command channel.

There are some specialized actions in stat pushing. Chief amongst them is
the ‘GI push.”

The usual indicator of this is a neglect or abandonment of staff or caring
about staff. One sees no real effective attention on recruitment, training, ap-
prenticing, hatting, future execs. And when one sees this it usually follows that
there is a “GI push” going on somewhere in the executive strata. Why this indi-
cator? Well, you see, it only takes a small handful of people to get in GI, and
where executive attention is fixated on a “GI push,” the various production staff,
HCO and the rest of the org aren’t “‘necessary.” You find this with EDs who reg
instead of getting Registrars and putting an org there, with EDs who go for
credit unions and odd financial deals. And you will also find they have the big-
gest number and amount of refunds and the biggest backlogs AND a shrinking
and unhappy org. Unfortunately, they soon also get a crashing GI, for none of
the support actions are being done across the divisions.

The reason “GI pushing” happens so often is the structure of the society
itself. The only real crime for which one can be punished by the governments of
today is lack of money. In other crimes if one has the huge sums necessary to
hire lawyers, one can often get off. But the crime of having no money is the only
crime one cannot get out of. There are even laws which cause the arrest on the
street of persons who do not have so much money in their pockets or wallets: it is
called “vagrancy.” So with the whole aberrated society on a big “GI push,” with
Wall Street measuring values only in how much something costs, with wages and
prices soaring, at this writing, to total social disaster, it is no wonder that short-
sighted and untrained or even aberrated executives get into a “GI push.”

The answer to not having money is, of course, to make more money. And there
is nothing whatever wrong with that. BUT that is not done with a “GI push.” It is
done with putting a whole org there, every part of it functioning and delivering
with all the bugs out of its lines, and making a lot, lot, lot more money. Fifty trained
staff producing everything an org is supposed to produce will make far more money
than five guys concentrating on GI only and letting the rest of the org go to blazes.
The GI made by the fifty will go on increasing. The GI made by the five (and not
backed up by the rest of the org) will decrease week by week and then crash.

Let us take some examples of “stat pushing”:

The room is cold and the staff is wearing overcoats and using blankets. Mr.
Stat Pusher walks over to the thermometer on the wall and sees that it reads very
low. So he yells at the thermometer, “Get the stat up!” Nothing happens of
course; it still says 15 degrees, so he yells at the staff, “Get that stat up!” Now,
in this instance, having a stat pusher around, the org has no Treasury Div and so
there was nobody to pay the bills and the fuel company has refused to deliver
further fuel. The janitor is missing because there is no HCO to hire one or keep
one on post so there’s no one to light the furnace even if it had fuel. And due to
an unhatted Financial Planning Committee, that also doesn’t meet or exist, no
new boiler was ordered when the old one blew up last year. The stat pusher

319
seems incapable of observing these facts, and is too unskilled to bring them to
rights. So he continues to yell ‘“‘Get the stat up” and the staff wears more and
more coats and blankets until at last it is just a quiet scene of solid ice.

If the letters out stat is down, this is a bad INDICATOR. It is vital that one
keeps stats and observes when one goes down. It is extremely hard to manage on
one’s post or in an org unless one has a stat. But, in going down, WHAT is
being indicated? A lack of letters out. So what does one do? Does he yell “Get
the letters stat up” or does he look into this? If he looked into it, he could find
the real Why, handle it and the letters stat would go up. He might find that the
Letter Reges were all sacked so as to increase the unit pay one week and that he
has somehow gotten a nut onto a personnel or finance post (whose R/Ses make
even his head jerk back and forth). He might find that the typewriters had broken
down. He might find that Dept 5 people were all being used by Div 5 to handle
their files. At the very least he will find something aberrated or ignorant going on
which has to be handled before the letters can be flooded out again. WHEN this
is found and handled, THEN the letters out stat will go up.

So Mr. Stat Pusher is essentially operating on a short circuit. He cannot or
will not look.

And there is another variety of stat aberration which comes about after a lot
of ‘Get the stat up” has failed. This is Mr. Stat Ignorer.

Mr. Stat Ignorer is driving along in a car and he looks at the speedometer. It
says 15 mph. He glares at the needle for a moment and then handles it. He pastes
a piece of paper over it so it can’t be seen. And sits back and drives contentedly.
If he’d looked, he would have found he had three flat tires and an engine about
to run out of oi] and explode.

Then there is also Mr. Stat Faker. He knows that he will get in trouble if his
STAT is down. So he simply dreams up a figure and puts it on graph paper. He
is encouraged and rendered confident in this because he is sure that no senior
will come around and notice the towers of unanswered letters or the huge back-
logs of cramming orders or the mobbed waiting room of unhandled public or the
mountain of uncorrected and unfiled address plates. He is confident because no
senior has in the last year or two. And he can say “I’m an upstat” when the
Ethics Officer tries to hit him for keeping the front door to the org obstructed
with his motorcycle. And he is recognizable by a caved-in case, low morale and
a hunted look of glee as he creeps through the org.

There is one common denominator the stat pusher, the stat ignorer and the
stat faker have. And that is AN ABSENCE OF SKILLED MANAGEMENT.

We have investigatory tech. It is there for use. We have the Data Series
evaluation tech. It is there for use. We have administrative tech. And it is all
published and there for use. And further, when it is known and used, proven
times without number now, production and prosperity occur AND show up as
statistics which INDICATE that production and prosperity are occurring.

Yes, it is very, very true that an org or a manager or an auditor or file clerk
gets in trouble if their stats are down.

320
Yes, it is true that stats should exist and be used.

But it is equally true that the way to get a stat is to put something there that
can get something done and get the lines debugged and the scene handled.

The fate of the stat pusher, the stat ignorer and the stat faker is to look
around one day and find no org.

It’s a very long way between yelling or telexing or writing “Get the stat up”
and handling things and getting production cycles completed so that the stat
WILL go up.

The stat, properly stated and honestly kept, IS a vital indicator of the scene.
If you know how to use them, you can get the areas that have to be handled. And
if you know your policy and tech, you can find the real Whys and get real han-
dlings and get things whizzing.

We mean to have all the stats going up because this INDICATES a bettering
state of affairs for everyone.

The job of the product officer is NOT to yell “Get the stats up.” The prod-
uct officer is there to notice and order things like “Get those letters answered so
they get answers.” And the job of the org officer is to carry out the handlings the
product officer finds necessary to get production rolling.

A fire-breathing product officer is worth his weight to every staff member IF
he is trying to get and is getting production which results in bettered conditions,
better products, better prosperity and THIS will incidentally show up in the stats.

It’s a world of things that have to be done and coordinated before the stats
go up.

We are in the business of people, we are in the business of a bettered world.
We have to have completed cycles of action. And these are shown in stats.

We are also in a world of exchange and would be no matter what ideology
we lived under. We have to “make GI” and we have to have “the stats up.”

But our success is measured in terms of the ACTIONS we do, for only those
show up in the indicators called statistics.

So, okay. Let’s go about it the right way. And find what is holding the stats

down and handle and correct those things and so, honestly and swiftly, become
upstat.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

321
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 20 SEPTEMBER 1976-1]

Remimeo ADDITION OF 17 APRIL 1977
All Staffs

Org Series 35-1
Executive Series 17-1

STAT PUSH CLARIFIED

This policy letter is revised. The second paragraph of the original said that it
was dangerous to talk about the subject because somebody could do an immedi-
ate make-wrong by saying, ‘““This means don’t try to raise any stats.”

Well, exactly that happened. There was a heavy campaign run into all Flag
Operations Liaison Offices and to orgs designed to discredit asking for raises in
stats. (The person who did it and failed to push production quotas is suspended
and under Comm Ev.)

The whole point seems to have been missed. It was this: You can’t ask for a
NUMBER; you CAN and MUST ask for a SOMETHING.

That something is a product. It is a thing, a tangible item.

Right this minute, as a result of a mission, HCO PL 16 Nov. 76, PRODUCTION
QUOTAS, has now been provided with thoroughly researched subproducts one
has to push in order to get the PRODUCTS. These are the real tangible actions
you have to take to get a number of actual products. In other words, by getting
many exact minor products, you then can achieve the valuable final product.

STATISTICS are those numbers which simply count the products attained or
obtained.

Stat management is the only kind of management you can do on a produc-
tion scene. Management by statistics was brought to a fine art in Scientology
admin tech. To discredit it is. of course, to court failure.

Abusing statistical management is also something of a crime. It has been
done by some managers who said “Get the stats up” without ever saying what sub-
products you had to get that would then make up the product.

Stat management is a valuable tool and has gotten us over the years. To
discredit it first by saying first just “Get the stats up” without saying how or what
or why was one side of the pendulum. Then the pendulum swung clear to the
extreme and people were being made guilty for even watching stats or demanding
or working to raise them.

So let’s get a little middle swing of the pendulum now.

322
It is perfectly all right to demand that stats rise so long as one says what
subproducts and products make up those stats and gives some indication of what
people should do to get the stats rising.

It is perfectly all right to do stat management.

And it is perfectly okay to come down hard on people or orgs who fail to get
their stats in viable range.

So long as you give them some idea of what small products (subproducts)
they have to get to make up the real products, you are NOT doing a stat push.

So long as you give people some direction and guidance, you can yell for
stat increases all you want.

And you better.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

323
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 NOVEMBER 1976
Remimeo
Flas Bu
All Orgs
Ext HCO FB

Admin Know-How Series 36
Org Series 36
Executive Series 18

Personnel Series 28

MANNING UP AN ORG
The Sequence of Posting Depts and Divs

You need an org board first and an allocation board.
The sequence in which an org is manned up is roughly:
— Dept 1

— Dept 11

— Reg and Body Routers and Intro people in Div 6

— Dept 12 (enough auditors and C/Ses to approach 2 admin to | tech in org)
— Dept 6

— Dept 7

— Dept 3

— SSO and Supers in Qual to train staff

— Dept 5 for CF, Address and Letter Reges

— Dept 4 for promo

— Dept 21 (LRH Comm)

— Dept 10

— Dept 20

— FR and execs

— Full Div 6

324
— Full Div 1
— Full Div 4
— Full Div 2
— Full Div 5
— Full Div 7
— Full Div 3

(Note, an AO always mans up the AO Dept or Div along with the SH one in
each case.)

Wrong sequence of manning is Dept 6, Dept 12, Dept 6, Dept 12, Dept 6,
Dept 12, as you wind up with a stuck clinic that won’t expand.

Wrong sequence will contract an org while trying to expand it, as the org
will go out of balance, bad units, noisy and unproductive.

If manned in a correct sequence, its income has a chance to stay abreast of
its new staff additions.

Emphasis on GI without comparable emphasis on delivery and organization
can throw an org into such a spin only a genius can run it.

Manned in proper sequence, and hatted as it goes, an org almost runs itself.

Single handing from the top comes from longstanding failures to man or
man in sequence, from earlier noncompliance with explicit orders or from not
understanding orgs in the first place.

An unhappy org that doesn’t produce has usually been manned only partially
and out of sequence.

The trick is planned manning, ignoring the screams of those who know best
or demand personnel; just manning by posting those who have been screamed for
the loudest is a sure way to wind up with no people and total org problems
instead of a total org that is prosperous and producing.

Incidently, this is a rough approximation of the sequence of hats the ED
gradually unloads as his org takes over.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

325
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 16 NOVEMBER 1976

Remimeo
All Staffs

Org Series 37
Executive Series 19

PRODUCTION QUOTAS

Ref:

HCO PL 8 Feb. 7211 Exec Series 7
TARGETING OF DIVISIONAL
STATISTICS AND QUOTAS

In a recent pilot, executed at my orders by the Staff Captain, it was found that:

WHERE A STAFF MEMBER DOES NOT KNOW THE SUBPRODUCTS
WHICH GO TO MAKE UP A GROSS DIVISIONAL STATISTIC THE
GDS WILL SUFFER AND FALL.

And it was also found:

WHERE SUBPRODUCTS ARE NOT GIVEN A QUOTA, QUOTAING A
GDS FAILS.

The report on the pilot follows and is given in full as it is an excellent example
of what a product officer or executive runs into and how it is solved.

“During the last two weeks, while running the FSO, I’ve had a lot of expe-
rience with the above subject, and thought that the data that I have on it might be
useful to you.

“When first going into the org I pushed for actual products along with quotaing
of the GDSes.

“This went over very well, however, the day you sent a telex to quota the
products that make up the stat, things really started moving much better.

“Your telex really opened the door for me as to how to go about getting an
org to work on products and get stats up.

‘Here is the best example. The week before last on Monday or Tuesday the
student points were heading for bad down stats for the week. The D of T was
more or less tearing her hair out about how she could meet her quota. She and
the Tech Sec were trying to figure out what had changed.

“This was right after I had read your telex referred to above, so what I did
was to tell them how they had to work on the products that make up the stat.

326
“The next step was to list out what the subproducts were that made up the
stat. I just made a very simple list, not necessarily a complete one, of: (1) course
starts, (2) F/Ning students, (3) students that are on target, (4) students that in-
crease their production daily. Then made sure the D of T would understand how
these made up the stat.

“The next step after that was to change 1—4 above into ‘number of.’

“This brought about what one could call instant sanity and exclamations of
realizations of how the area could be handled.

“This was followed up by making the D of T work on each of these products.
It took a lot of work and figure out how to do, as far, far from all students were
F/Ning, etc. It took actions like finding every bogged student and debugging him
on a flat-out basis.

“The end result was that the stat did not crash, but went up some, and this
week went up even more.

“Other actions were required in the area, such as the Qual Sec and Chief Off
sorting out the TRs Course, the D of T doing TRs, and more, but it worked
for sure.

“After this, we made this the pattern for the dept heads to follow: i.e., work
on the products and subproducts that make up the stat, list them out, quota them,
make the quotas, make your GDS quotas.

“It has also been put in on Dept 18 lines, so that Tours and external Reges
are no longer pushed on GI and bodies only. There is a pilot project with Flag
Service Consultant WUS since a few days which puts in a whole subproduct
system and quotaing and reporting on it, which was very well received.

“However, what I also wanted to tell you, is that this does not go in automati-
cally, we’re still catching bugs on it.

“These are the bugs that have been run across:

“1. Dir Reg had a bunch of subproducts and products beautifully quotaed,
but when asked what his quotas were for ‘closes’ and ‘completed Reg
cycles,’ he dropped his jaw as he had not thought about that.

“He immediately quotaed these and production increased right away.

“2. The Dir Procurement (Dissem Sec HFA) had not set any quotas for CF/
Address as she stated that ‘that area would not be possible to quota.’ Her
MU was that she thought she had to quota every single area of Ad-
dresso, rather than the part they were working on at the moment. She
had a major win on this.

“She also kept her quotas in her head as she ‘hated to have papers lying
around.’ She since has them all in a book and is very happy.

“3. The Dist Sec could not think of the subproducts that would produce
NNCEF.

327
“4. The Dir Income was working on subproducts in such a way that they did
not add up to his GDS, or rather, that they did not result in his GDS
quota being met, and tried to justify this.

‘Several others required close personal contacts to list out what the products
would be that made up their stat.

“MUs are still coming up, but it sure works! It’s brilliant, Sir.

“My picture of an org that operated on this basis with every staff member
should be incredible.

“Now, I have looked at the trouble an executive would run into implementing
the order to quota products that make up stats, and I can see lots, unless you
know exactly how to do it.

“This is what I see on it:

“You would have to keep the GDS quota there and in mind constantly, as if
you don’t, things can slack off too easily.

“You would have to bring the terminals concerned to an understanding of the
cycle of working on products that make up the stat.

“You would have to get a list of what the products and subproducts are,
without making it miles long.

“You would have to make sure that the list is complete, per policy and actu-
ally makes up the stat.

“You would then have to make sure that the list is quotaed.

“You would then have to make sure that the quotas are met, and you would
have to watch out for anyone using it wrongly so the GDS quota is not met.

“On most of these you would have to make sure that there are proper ‘figure
out how to do’s,’ on how to go about getting the products.

“The above actually, now that I look at it, fits in exactly with your PLs on
Name, Want and Get the Products.

“T think also what is of importance is that you really break down what it
takes to get the products: i.e., if the DTS here was told to get 10 fully paids into
the org, she would be ‘blank,’ until you broke it down into—make up the list of
them, make so many contacts, get so many ETAs, etc.

“Pressure is still required to get a momentum and keep it going.

“Another example is getting out over 100,000 pieces of promo in one week.
It takes incredible detailed planning that covers everything; when what has to be
through I/A and on to the assembly line, what checks have to be gotten when,
what has to be addressed when and franked, what all hands are needed and
when, etc. I had to force through exact planning on this with targets assigned,
etc., and then push like mad.

328
“The use of HCO PL 8 Feb. 72, Exec Series 7, TARGETING OF DIVI-
SIONAL STATISTICS AND QUOTAS, is also very important in all this.”

Therefore these conclusions can be considered valid and vital:

EVERY GDS MUST BE BROKEN DOWN INTO SUBPRODUCTS AND
THE STAFF MEMBERS MUST KNOW THEM IN ORDER TO ATTAIN
A GDS.

And:

EVERY SUBPRODUCT MUST BE QUOTAED FOR A GDS QUOTA TO
BE ATTAINED.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

329
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 20 JULY 1978

Remimeo

Org Series 38

HELD FROM ABOVE
DOUBLE-HATTING

There are two types of double-hatting.

One of these, we all know about and is very common and quite permissible.
This is what might be called “‘/evel” double-hatting. In this, for example, Mimeo
Files is also Mimeo Files Equipment. So long as one does not have a hat in each
of separate divisions and the hat is all in one division (and in a large org ail in
one department) not too much strain and trouble will result.

The other type of double-hatting can be called “vertical” double-hatting. In
this, the head of an area also holds an I/C hat in his own area.

We see this in “HFA” on org boards. “Held from above” is very common. A
Tech Sec is also D of P.

Well, in a small org that isn’t making any money and isn’t delivering, this
would be usual. Probably the Tech Sec would also be the only auditor.

But we are talking here about busy areas that produce where we condone too
much “HFA.”

Vertical double-hatting is a sure way to be under stress.

Example: The Artillery Officer, I/C of all artillery, takes on the hat of “Am-
munition Inventory I/C.” Well, he’s so tied up in counting shells he omits to
notice—as he should as Artillery Officer I/C—that they just lost their guns.
Result—lost battle, court-martial. And all because he was vertical double-hatted.

When a person occupies two points of different level on a command channel
he is asking for trouble. He is busy on the lower point, usually because it is a
full-time doingness, and so neglects many other sectors that should be supervised
from the higher point.

When I see “D of P” marked as HFA by the ED, I don’t have to look at
stats or future Ethics Orders for that org. I know exactly what they will be. The
D of P post might be being done but the org will be in a shambles for lack of
active supervision. The ED will soon be the subject of a mission.

Yes, one can do it for a week—even a month at times. BUT if one does not
straighten it out hell be on the aspirin route.

330
Advice to any I/C who is vertical double-hatted is:

1. Recruit
2. Train
3. Hat

the lower post quick and see that it produces.

CRAWL BACK UP THE ORG BOARD.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

331
Remimeo
All Orgs
All Staff

Refs:

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 9 AUGUST 1979R

Issue II

REVISED 19 NOVEMBER 1979

Establishment Officer Series 39
Org Series 39

SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER

The Flag Executive Briefing Course Tape Lectures
The Org Series

The Establishment Officer Series
Aug.

HCO PL

HCO PL
HCO PL
HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL

HCO PL
HCO PL
HCO PL

HCO PL
HCO PL
HCO PL
HCO PL
HCO PL
HCO PL

The post of SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER is hereby established in the
Office of the CO/ED, Dept 19, of all Class IV and Sea Org orgs. His direct

9

7
7
7

20

28

28
15
14

21
28
23
23

9
10

Aug.
Aug.
Aug.

Nov.
July
May
Nov.
Feb.

Nov.
Feb.

Aug.
Aug.
Aug.

July

senior is the CO/ED.

Until such time as a SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER is posted the respon-
sibilities and duties are covered by the Service/Call-in Committee as fully laid
out in HCO PL 9 Aug. 79 I, CALL-IN: THE KEY TO DELIVERY AND FU-
TURE INCOME and HCO PL 9 Aug. 79 III, SERVICE CALL-IN COMMITTEE.

The VALUABLE FINAL PRODUCTS of this post are (1) flawlessly serviced
and completed paid pcs and students who re-sign up for their next service, and (2)
high quality promotional items in the hands of volumes of public who come in, sign

79 |

76 I
76 II
76 Til

65

74

72
60
61

68

65
791
79 I
79 II
65

up and start an org service.

The main statistics for the SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER are:

CALL-IN: THE KEY TO DELIVERY
AND FUTURE INCOME

NAME YOUR PRODUCT

WANT YOUR PRODUCT

TO GET YOU HAVE TO KNOW HOW
TO ORGANIZE

THE PROMOTIONAL ACTIONS OF
AN ORGANIZATION

ADDITIONS TO PROMOTIONAL
ACTIONS OF AN ORGANIZATION
BOOM DATA

MODERN PROCUREMENT LETTERS
THE PATTERN OF A CENTRAL
ORGANIZATION

SENIOR POLICY

DELIVER

DEBUG TECH

DEBUG TECH CHECKLIST
SERVICE CALL-IN COMMITTEE
LINES AND TERMINALS, ROUTING

332
1. Number of pcs and students completed and re-signed onto their next
service. (This includes those actually routed on to the next upper org for
services and who do re-sign.)

2. Number of public in and started onto a service.

Completion: By completion is meant those actions completed and attested at
C&A and accompanied by an acceptable success story.

Re-sign: By re-sign-ups are meant pcs and students who, after completion of
a service, see the Registrar to sign up again for another service while in the org.

Promotional Items: Those items which will produce income for the organiza-
tion. By promotional items are meant those things which make Scientology and
our products known and will cause people to respond either in person or by
written reply to the result of receiving Scientology commodities. These are:
tours, book outlets, Sunday services, events, upstat image, fliers, info packs,
handouts, books, ASR packs, specified service promotion, etc.

There are of course many other stats that reflect the SERVICE PRODUCT
OFFICER’S subproducts and these are: VSD, TOTAL GI, INTENSIVES COM-
PLETED, BULK MAIL OUT, NUMBER OF PROMOTIONAL ACTIONS OF
THE ORG IN, NUMBER OF FULLY AND PARTIAL PAIDS GOTTEN INTO
THE ORG AND ONTO THEIR NEXT SERVICE. These are very important
parts of the SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER HAT, as they reflect his subproducts
which lead to his valuable final product.

SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER
RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES

The purpose of an organization is to deliver service to the public. The pri-
mary functions which add up to delivery to the public are: promotion, sales,
call-in, delivery itself and re-sign. The Service Product Officer is responsible for
the flow of products through these areas. He is a product officer. He names,
wants and gets products in these areas and thus ensures that the organization is
accomplishing its purpose of service to the public.

The full technology of product officers is explained in the Flag Executive
Briefing Course lectures, where the product—org officer system was developed.
This system is still fully valid and is, in fact, the tech of the Service Product
Officer. He is solely interested in products. When the Service Product Officer
comes across a situation that requires organizing, he gets his organizing officer
to handle it. The O/O (Organizing Officer) should actually be operating a few
steps ahead of the Service Product Officer at all times—organizing for immediate
production, per the product—org system. A full study of the product—org system,
as contained in the FEBC Tapes, the Org Series and Esto Series 31, 32 and 33,
NAME, WANT AND GET YOUR PRODUCT is recommended in order to attain
a thorough understanding of the actions of the Service Product Officer and his
organizing officer.

The Service Product Officer is not a stopgap at any point of the promotion,

sales, call-in, delivery and re-sign lines, where executives have failed to post and
hat staff. This would be the responsibility of the Exec Establishment Officer per

333
Esto Series 1. Establishment Officers see that short- and long-range establishment
are occurring in the organization in the form of recruiting, hatting and training
of staff. The Esto system is a necessary and very vital tool for the Service Product
Officer and the organization and should definitely be in full use.

The Service Product Officer has the authority to directly order or work with
any terminal involved in the promotion, sales, call-in, delivery or re-sign areas
so long as he maintains direct liaison with their seniors.

The Service Product Officer must be fully aware of every post in the org and
what their jobs consist of. He must know who handles what cycles and what cycles
are on the lines. For instance, it is up to the Service Product Officer to be aware of
all promotional actions occurring in the org and who is doing them, or if they aren’t
getting done. He must be aware of what public aren’t getting serviced and he ensures
those responsible get them serviced. He doesn’t do this himself as a serious goof of
any product officer would be to go down the org board and do the job himself. The
Service Product Officer must ensure others get the work done. Otherwise, he would
wind up doing everyone’s post and not getting anything done. It’s actually pretty
overwhelming to think of a Service Product Officer as responsible for doing every-
one else’s post duties. That’s the sure-fire way to sink fast. Where a product isn’t
getting out the Service Product Officer debugs it using HCO PL 23 Aug. 79 I, DE-
BUG TECH, in order to get production. He is not interested in first finding the
person’s Mis-U or excuse, he is interested in getting production occurring now. Let
the org officer and Qual worry about the staff member’s Mis-Us.

Divisional Secretaries are the product officers for their division per the
product—organizing officer system. The Service Product Officer sees that the
product officers over the whole delivery cycle are getting their products. He co-
ordinates the flow of products from division to division. A Service Product Of-
ficer doing his post fully and properly is, in fact, the person that makes the org
board work. He sees that products aren’t jamming up at one point of the line, but
that they continue through the organization.

The Service Product Officer walks into the Tech Div and finds the Tech Sec
sitting at his desk, shuffling paper and the pcs are piling high and complaining
about no service. The last thing the Service Product Officer would do is start
organizing the Tech staff around and scheduling the pcs. No sir, that’s a serious
offense. The first thing he would do is find out what can be produced RIGHT
NOW, what auditors can be gotten into session right now and makes the Tech Sec
do it and GET IT DONE. This all takes about 15 minutes and he gets the area
flowing again and then, WHAM! . . . he’s out and into his next area. The
Service Product Officer would not sit down and just start word clearing or doing
Exchange by Dynamics on the Tech Sec. He would unstick the flows and get
them moving. Then he would alert HCO and Qual to this serious problem of
unhattedness and demand it be handled.

The basic sequence of the Service Product Officer on getting the products
flowing off the lines is PUSH, DEBUG, DRIVE, NAME IT, WANT IT, AND
GET IT. That’s the only way you ever get a product. Products don’t happen on
their own.

This means he tells the Tech Sec to get Joe Blow there in session now! There
is no general “audit these pcs.” You’d never get a product that way.

334
The CO/ED has no authority to order the Service Product Officer to perform
the total duties of any one post. The Service Product Officer must guard against
being stuck into one post after another, doing it all himself. Nor is the Service
Product Officer an “‘expeditor” for the CO/ED.

It is also very important that the Service Product Officer advise seniors that
he is going into their areas so as not to create a Danger condition and wind up
having to run the entire org. He also does this by getting the seniors to handle
their juniors so a product is gotten. He does not walk in and cross-order the
seniors of areas but works with them to see that products are produced.

The Service Product Officer is one who comes up with BIG IDEAS on get-
ting public flooded into the org and being serviced swiftly. He is the one who
thinks along the line of PRODUCTS, PRODUCTS, PRODUCTS. By spanning
the divisions, he coordinates the product wanted and ensures each division is
aware of its part in getting this product and that their actions are uniform. Where
the Service Product Officer spots diversity, or lack of uniformity, he must alert
his org officer or HCO. By doing the actions of coordination for a product and
product demand, the product officer creates a team and more importantly sets
the pace of the org’s production and morale.

ORG LINES AND
THE SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER

There are certain aspects of the organization which the Service Product Of-
ficer must be thoroughly trained in to do his job properly.

The Service Product Officer must be fully aware of all the Valuable Final
Products (VFPs) of each department and each division of the org. Without this
the Service Product Officer can create havoc, as he would be ordering Division 6
to recruit or the Reges to supervise. By not knowing cold the org VFPs, the
Service Product Officer would certainly jam the flows throughout the org board.

A serious fault in any executive is not knowing the functions of terminals
and the relation of one terminal to another. A key function of any executive is
that of routing. An executive that misroutes communications and particles will
tie his org in knots and wonder why no products are coming out. Therefore, a
Service Product Officer must know cold every post function in the org and what
particles belong on what lines.

He has got to know where a product comes from and where it goes in order
to see it through the lines. A product officer’s job is to name, want and get a
product. However, he must first know where that product is to come from and
where it is to go. This is an incredibly fundamental point.

In order for org lines to flow, routing forms (RFs) must be used. A routing
form is a full step-by-step road map on which a particle travels. Every point a
particle (which could be a student, a pc, mail, etc.) must go through to wind up
at its destination must be listed on the routing form.

The Service Product Officer’s Organizing Officer must ensure routing forms
exist and are in use for each and every line in an org he deals in. Both he and the
Service Product Officer must know these forms cold and be able to instantly spot
when a line is being abused or ignored so as to slam in the correct routing.

335
A Service Product Officer must fully clay demo all the lines of an organiza-
tion for each and every product. This must include each particle from entrance to
the org and through all lines on which that particle would flow until it leaves the
org. Lines are the most fundamental point of administration. To not have a full
grasp of these lines would be detrimental to any product officer.

SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER
SEQUENCE OF ACTIONS

It is very easy for the Service Product Officer to become wrapped up in one
area while neglecting the others; however, this must not be done as, while products
might be getting through in one area, they may well be seriously bogging in others.

The Service Product Officer is concerned with promotion, sales, call-in, de-
livery and re-sign. He begins his product officering in promotion and gets prod-
ucts out there or started and moves on to sales and gets them on to getting their
products and so on through call-in and delivery and re-sign. He then returns to
the beginning, promotion, and follows up on what he started there and gets even
more production out. This is basically how the Service Product Officer moves
through the org.

Daily, the Service Product Officer must plan and battle plan out his day. He
must list those products he intends to achieve in each one of his areas and then
gets them.

The Service Product Officer is not an “information courier” or “data gath-
erer.” He is ahead of the game and knows the data. He must know what public
haven’t been regged in the org yet, he must know who hasn’t been taken into
session that day, or who has been stuck in Ethics for 3 days, and ensure these
things get handled. Therefore he must be quicker and faster than anyone else in
the org and run run run.

PROMOTION

Promotion is the first action of the SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER. He must
ensure the many promotional pieces and actions are getting done. Some of these are:

1. Selling of books.
2. Staff selling books.

iv)

. Books placed in public bookstores.

4. Selling of books to FSMs, missions, distributors, retailers and salesmen.
5. Books sold on each public contact.

6. Books advertised in mags, ads, posters, fliers, etc.

7. ASR packs.

8. Info packs.

9. Div 6 handouts for lectures and free testing.

336
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.

. Posters on major services in Div 6.

. Promo to field auditors, FSMs, Gung-ho Groups, Dianetic study groups.
. Org mags.

. Flag shooting boards.

. Promo for future events and tours.

. The Auditor (for SHs).

. Clear News.

. Advance! mag (for AQOs).

. Source mag (FSO).

. | Want To Go Clear Club promo (AOs).

. SHSBC/NED/internships/NOTs/grades, etc., specified in promo.

. Promo at points of public inquiry.

. Free testing ads.

. Fliers inviting people to buy Scientology books.

. More-Info-Cards used in books.

. Ads in newspapers.

. Questionnaires to detect people’s plans for training and processing.
. Enough letters to public so they come in.

. All promotional actions per HCO PL 20 Nov. 65, PROMOTIONAL

ACTIONS OF AN ORGANIZATION.

Book seminars, public campaigns and lectures.

Public Reception display (books, posters, handouts, etc.).
Tours and events, Sunday service.

Free testing line.

Handling of Gung-ho Groups, keeping FSMs well supplied and supervi-
sion of Dianetic study groups and FSMs.

Test Centers outside the org as an extension.
Radio and TV advertisements.

Dept 17 services.

337
37. Reception greeting, handling, routing, chasing up people for appointments
and handling incoming calls with ARC and efficiency.

38. Formation of Dianetic Counseling Groups.
39. Weekly tape and film plays.
40. Promotes the org and standard tech to Auditors Association.

41. Contacts and sees any sign of ARC broken field and alerts Chaplain to
clean up the field.

The first thing a Service Product Officer would want to do is get out a large
volume of promo to at least get some activity occurring. This would entail Dis-
sem getting any promo laying around the org dug up and sent out to students and
pcs. They would get it out in letters and mailings, they would get it handed out to
students and pcs, they would pick up the half-completed promo piece, have it
fixed up and sent out. They would have promo placed in Reception, in any public
inquiry, etc. In other words, the Service Product Officer ensures that the org fully
utilizes what promo they do have. He would also have specific promo pieces
done to enlighten the field on what services the org has. Where any of this
bogged he would push—debug—drive—name it—want it—and get it.

The Service Product Officer, in trying to get in any promotional items, must
review what resources he has. For example, is there a Dir Clearing, is there a
Receptionist, etc.? He must concentrate on getting those terminals that already
exist busy on promotional actions that will create the largest volume of inflow,
while his organizing officer works on getting more immediate resources to in-
crease the volume even further. It would be senseless to have the Dir Clearing
running around trying to form up groups in an inactive field, single-handing,
when he has FSMs that need to be gotten on to selecting and driving in new
public. The Service Product Officer is concerned with priorities of promotional
actions, so must be totally aware of all the promotional items and actions that an
org can produce.

Actions such as “improved org appearance,” “high ARC handling,” and
“correct and efficient routing of public” can be put in instantly. If he has 2
people in all of Dissem he still can and must get the particles flowing and
products coming off the line.

SALES

The sales lines consist of enlightening the public, having lines to sign people
up, getting public into the org and signed up for service.

The following gives you an idea of some of the sales actions and lines in an org:
1. Body Reg phones and schedules public to come in for interview.

2. Use of CF to produce business.

3. Reges who accept advance registrations.

4. D of T procurement of students.
5

D of P procurement of pcs.

338
6. Receptionist sells to public coming in.

7. SHs in communication with the Class [V Org Tech Secs and Registrars
and targeting them for public completing and routing on to the higher
org.

8. AO’s and SH’s case consultant actions.

9. AO/SH events to Class IV Org Academies to encourage upper level
auditor training.

10. Use of FSMs, Auditors Associations, personal contact, etc., to get public
into the org and on to their next service.

11. Fast lines so public are not left waiting to see the Reg.

The lines of routing a public person to the Reg, or from the Reg to a service
must be tight so public aren’t lost, and the Reg is kept busy continuously with the
public. Therefore, the Service Product Officer must police these lines and where
he notices any lack of uniformity he gets his org officer onto it. Nonuniform or
slow routing interferes with the product, so the Service Product Officer gets it
speeded up now by push—debug—drive—name it—want it—and get it.

The first actions of the Service Product Officer in the sales area are to get all
“in-the-org” public routed to the Reg on breaks or after course end to be further
signed up for additional service. He can also have Dissem drilling done with
Reges so as to increase sales in the org. His operating procedure is products,
products, products, now, now, now. His org officer or HCO and Qual can worry
about organize, organize, organize.

CALL~IN

Call-in is the action of getting fully paids into the org on to their next service.
This also includes getting partially paids fully paid and on to their next service.
These functions are of great concern to the SERVICE PRODUCT OFFICER as un-
delivered services to the public can mess up a field and increase the chance of
refunds. The Service Product Officer should see to it that the Call-in Units are
given stiff targets and that their production is not monitored by low auditor hours
or low-producing training areas. The execution of needed programs to get Call-in
Units fully operational is under the Service Product Officer per HCO PL 9 Aug.
79 I, CALL-IN: THE KEY TO DELIVERY AND FUTURE INCOME. This
same policy also lists out the functions of the Call-in Units. Call-in falls between
sales and delivery, as it deals with those either fully or partly paid and needing
only to finish payment and be called in and gotten onto service.

DELIVERY

The Service Product Officer must ensure that the service lines of the org are
fast and 100 percent standard, that pcs and students do complete quickly and
don’t get lost off the lines.

The Service Product Officer is to have an alert line with the public set up

whereby if a student or pc’s study or auditing is slowed, or if the public person is
dissatisfied in any way, he can alert the Service Product Officer so it can be handled.

339
Some of the actions and lines to be product officered by the Service Product
Officer are as follows:

1. Tech Services arranges housing, has the pc met when he is arriving and
generally operates as the pc’s host while in the org.

2. The many lines such as pc to Ethics, pc to Examiner, student to Ethics,
student to Qual, C/S Series 25 line and pc to D of P line must be drilled
so they are flawless and handled with ARC.

3. The most senior policy applied to this area is HCO PL 21 Nov. 68,
SENIOR POLICY, “WE ALWAYS DELIVER WHAT WE PROMISE.”

4. There must be an adequate amount of auditors, Tech Pages and FESers,
Ds of P, Supervisors, Course Admins, etc.

5. The auditing line must be fast so no pcs wait to be serviced.

6. Use of all hands tech terminals in the org auditing when required to
handle backlogged service.

7. Getting students through their courses and on to their internship at which
point they can audit in the HGC.

8. Proper scheduling so every pc gets in 122 hours a week minimum.
9. Recovering blown auditors, getting them fixed up and auditing.

The Service Product Officer ensures tech lines are fast. For instance, a pc’s
folder not getting C/Sed for days, or idle auditors and Ds of P “waiting” for pcs
when they can be made to procure pcs, must be spotted and handled by the
Service Product Officer.

The Service Product Officer must be kept briefed on what pcs and students
arrive and how they are going to be handled. He must get around to these areas
(Training and HGC) to ensure that there are no slows with public or anything that
would get in the way of public receiving top-quality service.

Service to the public is the reason the org is there and service must be kept
fast and 100 percent standard and plentiful. This is a primary duty of the Service
Product Officer; he is there to ensure this occurs.

It is losses on service that keep public away, org income down and staff
pay low.

RE-SIGN-UP
The re-sign-up line is also very key to an organization’s prosperity. It brings
further income, and proves conclusively that the last service received by the public

person was of high quality. This is why the Service Product Officer must be very
alert to the amount of re-signs. Some of the things that should be watched for are:

1. That the Reg is supplied with an upstat cert for his last completed ser-
vice to present to the student or pc.

340
2. That the Reg knows fully how to handle the public person that won't
re-sign (by sending them to Qual).

3. The Reg must be provided with tech estimates, Grade Chart informa-
tion, etc., so he is aware ahead of time of what the student or pc’s next
action is.

4. Tech terminals are fully briefed and the line is in that every completion
gets routed to the Reg. This must be drilled.

The public person should be serviced in your org until he/she requires upper-
level service that your org cannot deliver, at which point they should be directed
to the next higher org.

PITFALLS

The Service Product Officer can lose his effectiveness if he takes any “hey
you” orders or gets stuck in at various points. He is not an expeditor. He is not
an information and full-time coordinator terminal. He is an executive, a product
officer, and he is there to ensure the entire machine runs.

He must be well versed on actions occurring in the org. He must also pay
strict attention to completing actions he has started and to carry a handling
through to a done. Otherwise he can wrap himself around a pole with incomplete
cycles which will ball up the line and prevent the service lines from flowing
flawlessly.

Where the Service Product Officer post bogs it is undoubtedly due to a lack
of an organizing officer, as with the speed in which a Service Product Officer
demands products, he requires a fast-moving org officer. So it is essential this
post be provided with an org officer as soon as possible.

Those personnel in the org who are responsible for organization, any Esto
personnel, etc., are the people who put the units in the org there. It is not the
duty of a Service Product Officer to man and hat the org. Therefore, it is a lot of
sweat off the Service Product Officer’s brow to have a fully functioning Esto
team backing up his actions in getting the flow of products out of the organization.

SUMMARY

The Service Product Officer ensures all the actions of getting public into,
through and out of the org are accomplished with high quality results.

It is extremely important that this post be manned in each and every org. It
doesn’t just make the difference between a poor, empty org and a good org. This
post makes the difference between a good org and a booming org.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

341
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 FEBRUARY 1980

Remimeo
Exec Hats
All Staff Hats
Establishment Officer Series 40
Org Series 40
Product Debug Series 9
ORDER VERSUS DISORDER
Refs:
HCO PL 9 Feb. 74R CONDITION BELOW TREASON
Rev. 17.2.80 CONFUSION FORMULA AND
EXPANDED CONFUSION FORMULA
HCO PL 30 Dec. 70 ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL

I made a breakthrough recently, while investigating low production areas,
and realized that a good deal more needs to be said on the subject of order and
disorder.

Order is defined as a condition in which everything is in its proper place and
performs its proper function. A person with a personal sense of order knows
what the things in his area are, he knows where they are, he knows what they are
for. He understands their value and relationship to the whole.

A personal sense of order is essential in getting out products in an area.

An orderly typist, for instance, would have ail the materials requiring typing,
she would have ample paper and carbons within arm’s reach, she would have her
correction fluid to hand, etc. With all preparatory actions done, she would sit
down to type with an operational typewriter and would know what that type-
writer was and what it was for.

She would be able to sit down and get her product, with no wasted motion or
stops.

But let’s say you had a carpenter who couldn’t find his hammer and he
didn’t even know what a hammer was for and he couldn’t find his chisel because
when he picked it up he put it down and couldn’t find it again and then he didn’t
know where his nails were. You give him a supply of lumber and he doesn’t
know what it’s for, so he doesn’t categorize it where he can put his hands on it.

How many houses do you think he would build?

The actual fact of the case is that a disordered person, operating in a disor-
ganized area, makes a ten-minute cycle into a three-week cycle (believe it, this is

342
true) simply because he couldn’t find his ruler, lost his eraser, broke his type-
writer, dropped a nut and couldn’t find it again and had to send off to Seattle for
another one, etc., etc., etc.

BASICS

In working with a group of nonproductive technicians recently, I discovered
something interesting: out-basics. I actually found a lower undercut to what we
generally think of when we say “basics.”

These technicians had reportedly researched a key piece of equipment and
had it all sorted out. But I found that they didn’t even know the basic fundamen-
tal of what that machine was supposed to do and what they were supposed to be
doing in their area!

That told me at once that they had no orderly files, no research data. They
were losing things.

Now, if they were losing things, that opened the door to another basic: They
couldn’t have known where things were. They put down a tool over there and
then when they needed it again they would have to look all over the place because
they hadn’t put it down where it belonged.

Their work was not organized so that it could be done and the tools were not
known.

So I checked this out. Were they logging the things they were using in and
out so they could find them again? Were they putting things away when they were
done with them? No, they weren’t.

This is simply the basic admin coupled with the knowledge of what the
things one is working with are. It’s orderliness and knowing what things are,
knowing what they are for and where they are, etc. That’s the undercut.

If people don’t have a true knowledge of what the things they’re working
with are, if there are omitted tools, inoperational tools, if they don’t know what
their tools are supposed to do, if there are no files or if once used, files are not
reassembled and put back in the file drawer, if things get lost and people don’t
know where things are and so on, they will be running around spending 3 or 4
hours trying to locate a piece of paper. That isn’t production.

If a person can’t tell you what the things he works with are, what they’re for
and where they are, he isn’t going to get out any product. He doesn’t know what
he’s doing.

It’s like the carpenter trying to build a house without knowing what he’s got
to build it with, without understanding his tools and raw materials and the basic
actions he must take to get his product. That’s what was holding up production in
the area: disorderliness. And the basics were out.

This is actually far below knowing the tech of the area—the actual tech-
niques used to get the product. The person does not even know what his tools
and equipment are or what they’re supposed to do. He doesn’t know whether
they are operational or inoperational. He doesn’t know that when you use a tool

343
you return it to its proper place. When you have a despatch, you put it in a file
where it can be retrieved. It undercuts even knowing the orders and PLs relevant
to his hat.

What are the basics that are missing? The basics of sitting down to the table
that one is supposed to sit down to, to do the work! The basics of knowing what
the tools, materials and equipment he works with are and what he’s supposed to
do with them to get his product. Those are the basics that are missing.

We are down to a real reason why a person cannot turn out products.

That is what is holding up such a person’s production. It is well below know-
ing the technique of his job.

Out-basics. Does the guy know where the file is? When he finishes with that
file, does he leave it scattered all over the place or does he put it back together
and into the file where it can be found?

Now, a person who’s working will have papers all over the place, but does he
know where they are and is he then going to reassemble them and put them back
in order or is he going to just leave them there and pile some more papers on top
of them?

If you find Project No. 2 scattered on top of Project No. 1, you know some-
thing about that area. Basics are out.

This is a little piece of tech and with that piece of tech you’ve got insight.
You would have to have an overall picture of what the area would look like when
properly ordered and organized—how it would be organized to get optimum pro-
duction.

Then you could inspect the area and spot what’s going on. You would in-
spect on the basis of: How does the area compare with how it should be organ-
ized? You would find out if the personnel didn’t know what the things in their
area were or what they were for, you would see if they knew the value of things
in the area or if there were altered importances, omitted files or filing, actions
being done out of sequence, inoperational tools or equipment, anything added to
the scene that was inapplicable to production, etc.

In other words, you can inspect an area by outpoints against this one factor
of orderliness.

This sort of out-basics and disorderliness cuts production down to nothing.
There just won’t be any production at all. There will be no houses built.

What we are talking about here is an orderly frame of mind. A person with
a sense of order and an understanding of what he is doing sits down to write a
story or a report and he’ll have his paper to hand; he’ll have it fixed up with
carbons and he’ll have his reference notes to hand. And before he touches the
typewriter, he'll familiarize himself with what the scene is. He’ll do the neces-
sary preparatory work in order to get his product.

Now, someone else might sit down, write something, then dimly remember
there was a note someplace and then look for an hour to find where that note was

344
and then not be able to find it and then decide that it’s not important anyway and
then come back and forth a few times and finally find out he’s typed it all up
without a carbon.

There is a handling for this. Anyone trying to handle an area who doesn’t
understand the basics of what they’re dealing with and is in an utter state of
disorder must get a firm reality on the fact that until the basics are learned and
the disorder handled, the area will not produce satisfactorily.

The following inspection is used in determining and handling the state of
such an area.

INSPECTION

This inspection is done in order to determine an area’s knowledge of basics
and its orderliness. It can be done by an area’s senior for the purpose of locating
and correcting disordered areas. It is also used as part of debug tech as covered
in HCO PL 23 Aug. 79, DEBUG TECH. It is for use by anyone who is in the
business of production and getting products.

The full inspection below would be done, clipboard in hand, with full notes
made and then handlings would be worked out based on what was found in the
inspection (according to the Handling section of this PL and the suggested han-
dlings given in parentheses below).

1. DOES HE KNOW WHAT ORGANIZATION, FIRM OR COMPANY HE’S IN? DOES
HE KNOW WHAT HIS POST OR JOB IS?

This is a matter of does he even know where he is? Does he know what the
organization or company he works for is, does he know what the post he is
holding is?

(If he is so confused and disoriented that he doesn’t even know the company
or org he’s in or doesn’t know what his post is, he needs to apply the Ex-
panded Confusion Formula, HCO PL 9 Feb. 74R, and then work up through
the conditions.

Of course the person would also need to be instant-hatted on his post—the
organization, his post title, his relative position on the org board, what he’s
supposed to produce on his post, etc.
If he is doing this handling as part of his Expanded Confusion Formula,
simply have him get the instant hatting and carry on with his Confusion
Formula. )

2. ASK THE PERSON WHAT HIS PRODUCT IS.
Does he know? Can he tell you without comm lag or confusion?
You may find out that he has no idea of what his product is or that he has a

wrong product or that he has confusions about his product. Maybe he doesn’t
even know he’s supposed to get out products.

345
(If this is the case, he must find out what his product is. If the person’s
product is given in policy references, he should look these up. If his product
is not covered in tech or policy references, he’ll have to work out what it is.)

. CAN HE RATTLE OFF A LIST OF THE BASIC ACTIONS, IN PROPER SEQUENCE,
NECESSARY TO GET OUT HIS PRODUCT OR DOES HE HEM AND HAW ON IT?

Does he know what to do with his product once it is completed?

He may try to tell you what he does each day or how he handles this or that
and what troubles he’s having with his post. You note this, but what you’re
interested in is does he know the basic actions he has to take to get out his
product? And does he know what to do with the product once it is complete?

(If he can’t rattle off the sequence of actions 1, 2, 3, then he’d better clay
demo the basic actions, in proper sequence, necessary to get out his product
and then drill these actions until he can rattle them off in his sleep. If he
does not know what to do with his product once completed, then he’d need
to find out and then drill handling the completed product.)

. ASK HIM WHAT HIS TOOLS ARE THAT ENABLE HIM TO GET THIS PRODUCT.

Note his reaction. Can he name his tools at all? Does he include the signifi-
cant tools of his area? Does he include his hat pack as a tool?

(If he doesn’t know what his tools are, he’d better find out what he’s oper-
ating with and what it does. A good workman knows his tools so well he can
use them blindfolded, standing on his head and with one arm tied behind his
back.)

. ASK HIM TO SHOW YOU HIS TOOLS.

Are his tools present in the work area or does he have them out of reach,
down the hall or in some other room?

(He may have to reorganize his work space to get his tools within easy reach
and to get in some basics of organization. The purpose of such organization
would be to make production easier and faster.)

- ASK HIM TO TELL YOU WHAT EACH OF HIS TOOLS ARE.

Can he define them? Does he know what each of them are and what they are
for?

(If he doesn’t know, he’d better find out.)

. ASK HIM TO TELL YOU WHAT THE RELATIONSHIP IS BETWEEN EACH ONE OF
HIS TOOLS AND HIS PRODUCT.

(If he can’t do this, have him clay demo the steps he takes to get out his

products with each tool he uses, so he sees the relationship between each
tool and his product.)

346
10.

11.

12.

. ASK HIM TO NAME OFF THE RAW MATERIALS HE WORKS WITH. ASK HIM

TO SHOW YOU HIS MATERIALS.

Does he know what his raw materials are? Are they in his work area? Are
they in order? Does he know where to get them?

(He may have to find out what the raw materials of his post are [by defining
them] and where they come from. He should drill procuring and handling
them and then run Reach and Withdraw on them.)

. DOES HE HAVE A FILE CABINET? FILES? ASK HIM WHAT THEY ARE.

Does he know what they are for? Does he know what a despatch is, etc.?

(He may have to be brought to an understanding of what files, file cabinets,
despatches, etc., are and what they have to do with him and his product. He
may have to clay demo the relationship between these things. He will have to
set up a filing system. Ref: HCO PL 18 Mar. 72, Esto Series 10, FILES.)

DOES HE HAVE A SYSTEM FOR LOCATING THINGS?

Ask to see it. Check his files. Does he have logs? Does he log things out and
correct the logs when he puts them back? Are the comm baskets labeled?
Does he have a specific place for supplies? Ask him to find something in his
files. How long does it take?

Does he have an orderly collection of references or a library containing the
materials of his field? Is it organized so as to be usable?

(If he has no system for locating things, have him set one up. Have him
establish a filing system, a logging system, label the comm baskets, arrange
supplies, etc. Get a reference library set up and organized. Drill using the
system he has.)

WHEN HE USES AN ITEM, DOES HE PUT IT BACK IN THE SAME PLACE?
DOES HE PUT IT BACK WHERE OTHERS CAN FIND IT?

He’ll probably tell you, yes, of course he does. Look around. Are objects
and files lying about? Is the place neat or is it a mess? Ask him to find you
something. Does he know right where it is, or does he have to search
around? Is there an accumulation of unhandled particles around?

(Have him clay demo why it might be advantageous to put things back in the
same place he found them. Drill him on putting things back when he’s fin-
ished with them. Have him clean up the place, handling any accumulation of
unhandled particles.)

IF FEASIBLE, ACTUALLY GO WITH THE PERSON TO HIS PERSONAL LIVING
AREA.

Is the bed made? Is the area clean? Are things put away? How much dirty
laundry does he have? Is it stowed in a bag or hamper or is it strewn about
the place? People who had disorderly personal mest, 1 for 1, were not get-
ting out any products on post—they had no sense of order.

347
(If his personal quarters are a mess, have him—on his own time of course—
straighten up his personal area and keep it that way on a daily basis. This
will teach him what order is.)

HANDLING

Some areas, of course, will be found to be in excellent order and will pass
the inspection. These will most likely be high production areas.

Other areas will be found to have only a few points out which would correct
easily with the above handlings. These will probably be areas where some pro-
duction is occurring.

Where personnel have a concept of what order is and why it is important,
they will usually be eager to correct the points of disorder that have turned up on
the investigation and may need no further urging, drilling or correction, but will
quickly set about remedying outpoints. For many bright and willing staff mem-
bers just reading this policy will be enough to get them to straighten out their
areas right away.

There is, however, a sector which has no concept of order and may not have
the slightest notion of why anyone would bother with it. You will most likely find
them in apathy, overwhelm or despair with regard to their post areas. No matter
what they do they simply cannot get their products out in adequate quantity and
quality. They try and try and try but everything seems to be working against
them.

When you find such a situation, know that the area is in Confusion. You are
trying to handle an area which is in a confirmed, dedicated condition of Confusion.

Such an area or individual would require the application of the Expanded
Confusion Formula (HCO PL 9 Feb. 74R) including the handlings above. So if
these things confirm in an area, you must use the Expanded Confusion Formula
and the handlings given above to full completion. Because, frankly, such an area
or individual is in a condition of Confusion and will remain in Confusion until
the Expanded Confusion Formula, including the full handlings from the inspec-
tion, are applied.

Once out of Confusion the person would have to be brought up through the
rest of the conditions.

CAUTION

The condition of Confusion is a very low condition and should never be
assigned where it is not warranted. Where one or two points on the above inspec-
tion were found to be out in an area, and where these corrected easily, there
would be no purpose in assigning Confusion to that area. In fact, it may worsen
an area to asSign an incorrect condition.

But where you have a long-term situation of no or few products combined
with a state of disorder, know that the area or individual is in a condition of
Confusion and that the application of the Confusion Formula plus the handlings
given in this PL will bring the area out of the muck and up to square one where
it can begin producing.

348
NOTE: If the inspection is done on a person or area and some of the points
are found to be out and handlings are done but no condition of Confusion is
assigned, the area must be reinspected about a week later. This way you will
detect if an actual condition of Confusion was missed, as the area will have
lapsed back into disorderliness or will have worsened.

SUMMARY

A knowledge of the basics of an area and having orderliness in an area are
essential to production.

When you find a fellow who is a light-year away from the basics and doesn’t
have a clue on the subject of order and he’s flying way up in the sky someplace
instead of just trying to put together what he’s supposed to put together or do
what he’s supposed to do, you’ve got your finger on his Why for no production.

With the inspection and handlings given in this policy, we can now handle
any degree of disorderliness and disorganization.

And order will reign.
Nonproductive areas become capable of producing.
Already-producing areas increase their production.

And production will roll.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

349
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 28 FEBRUARY 1980

Remimeo

Org Series 41
Finance Series 25

Executive Series 21

PRODUCTION AND ONE’S STANDARD OF LIVING

Refs:
HCO PL 19 Mar. 71RA II Finance Series 7RA
Rev. 27.10.82 BEAN THEORY—FINANCE AS A
COMMODITY
HCO PL 9 Mar. 72R I Finance Series LIR
Rev. 4.8.83 INCOME FLOWS AND POOLS
PRINCIPLES OF MONEY MANAGEMENT
HCO PL 27 Nov. 71 Exec Series 3
MONEY
HCO PL 3 Dec. 71 Exec Series 4
EXCHANGE
FEBC Tapes

(NOTE: I realize that management units, orgs and staffs are daily pounded
with false economic data. The real facts of life collide with much false data.
Such crippling data comes from many sources—school, advertisers, government,
bankers, propagandists, even parents who insisted Johnny be a doctor so he could
“live well” or set a horrible example themselves. Many have had a hand in mess-
ing up people’s wits on the subject. Jt is a factor in inhibiting the individual
prosperity of executives, staff members and orgs. Where an area is not prosper-
ing, this PL should be star-rated on its people and the false data they have on this
subject stripped so that they then can prosper as they should.)

“Standard of Living” can be defined as the relative quality of a person’s or
group’s possessions, quarters, food, equipment, tools and conditions of their area
of work and existence. It is the state of the person’s living, including working,
environment. Where its potential continuance exists, it is related to survival. It is
a basic natural economic law that personal production of VFPs and one’s stand-
ard of living are intimately related.

This applies to the individual as well as the team.
Where violations occur, inequities exist.

At a persona! level one must produce in excess of his standard of living just
to retain and maintain it.

Actually, the “excess” means that because of overload, taxes, services, plant,
utilities, raw materials, machine and other costs additional to his own work sphere, a
person cannot expect to get the full value of his VFPs all to himself. That is not

350
economically feasible. The “‘excess” varies from post to post and job to job but
is never less than 5X minimum. In industry it is considered to be at least 10X to
maintain company standards and solvency. The “excess” can be very high indeed
in some industries. But in any case any idea that it should be one-for-one is fatal.
People who know little of economics or management sometimes propose a
worker should get the full value of his VFPs—but all work and all VFPs require
support services and to neglect these would quickly bring on poverty. Even when
working for oneself alone, these “excess” factors exist and seldom drop below
5X as one still requires support services. Corrected gross income divided by staff
has to be at least 5X the cost of the standard of living of the individual staff
member for that standard to be barely maintained. This does not mean staff pay
should be ¥s of that figure. It means that all the things (pay included) that go into
maintaining their welfare and work environment would have to be covered by
of that figure. A fairly efficient and prosperous org with a hatted, industrious,
gung-ho staff can very easily maintain quite acceptable standards at io that fig-
ure. The actual cash value of every piece of work done by a person can actually
be calculated. It is intricate and tricky to do and much subject to over and under
estimation but it can be done. It is not vital to do this but one might just be
curious about it. If so, do it for yourself. Thus VFPs can be priced against what
they bring in as part of the overall scene even when they seem indirect. All the
above figures are very rough and subject to variation but this gives you some
idea of what is meant by “excess” in that law.

Where a number of people in a group or on a team do not produce VFPs in
excess of their standard of living, they depress the standard of living of the group
or team.

Where some in a group do not only not produce VFPs but produce overt
products, they actively depress the standard of living of everyone in that group or
on that team.

Many economists and theorists seek to avoid that law. They do it to gratify
politicians or aggrandize some false philosophy whose true purpose is suppres-
sion under other colors. But the law remains and its violation breeds an epidemic
of economic ills. Amongst such ills are inflation, superbureaucracy, chaos with
the marketplace and a decay of the civilization.

When a whole society demands a high standard of living and yet doesn’t
concentrate on the personal production of VFPs, it is finished.

Products are the basis of a standard of living. They don’t appear from mid-
air. They come from work truly done. Not from hope or false data.

It is a druggie’s dream that machines, computers, under the dictatorship will
do it all. Machines can raise a standard of living by assisting in production. But
they can’t do man’s living for him. Intelligently designed and used, they permit,
within limits, increases in population. But machines are just tools. They have to
be thought up, designed, built, run and serviced and their raw materials and fuel
have to be found and delivered and their products promoted, delivered, used and
often in their turn serviced. The machine age was actually recognized as failed
when world leaders first began to urge population reduction on the planet to
“improve the individual standard of living.” If machines were going to solve it
all, why is the civilization now in such a steep decline? It took producing men

351
working in and with a machine age to make the society go. Not idle mobs on
welfare expecting a high standard of living while a few guys work their guts out.
Pie in the sky is nice but did anyone ever get to eat it? This misinterpretation of
the machine age was a heavy violation of the above economic law. But the real
harm of the machine age was creating a false belief that one did not have to
produce much to survive. This lowered people’s estimate of how much they
would themselves have to produce to survive, much less have a high standard of
living. Factually one normally has to work fast and expertly and in high volume
to bring about any acceptable standard of living for himself and his group. This
is a point the machine age obscures. But it remains vividly and demonstrably true.

An executive who works hard yet wonders about his own low standard of
living should look over his people to find those who are not producing VFPs or
who produce even overt products while yet demanding a living. They are absorb-
ing the potential raised standard of living of the group.

Where a group has a very low standard of living, it need only review the
above law and its potential violations to understand why.

One cannot, in fact must not, increase the standard of living of a group in
ways that violate the above law. It will eventually bring calamity on that group.

In a society led astray by crackpot economics, violations of the above law
create a vast number of wrong examples. The rich (most of whom work like
mad) are seen as idle or even criminals. The best way of life is made to appear to
be idleness. One seems to be owed a living without any effort on his own part.
The producing worker should be fined by higher taxation. These are not seen to
be simply false data spread about to wreck the place but are held as “truths.”
And in their wake comes a funeral for that group or society.

There is even an economic theory spread about today called ‘“equalitarian-
ism.” It declares everyone should get the same pay and have the same standard
of living. It does not mention that anyone should do any work. It holds that the
better worker should not be better rewarded. It would crash any society.

Then there is the ‘“‘monetarist” who believes you can manipulate a whole
society with money alone. And no thought of any production. His answer to pro-
duction? (You won’t believe this.) Decrease demand! In other words, reduce ev-
eryone’s standard of living!

Basic economics eventually catches up with all these weird false pretenses. It
may take time but, as in the law of gravity, the apple eventually falls no matter
how many crackpots advance theories to say it can’t fall, will go up, or vanish.
Real basic economic laws are like that. They catch up. So don’t wonder about
inflation and depression and decayed civilizations. Basic economics caught up
with the crackpots.

An executive has to pay attention to the basic law about a standard of living.
If he doesn’t pay close attention to it, the standard of living of himself and of his
group will cave in.

He can be “a good fellow” and seek popularity by attempting to raise the
standard above what is earned. He and his group will crash.

352
He can be foolish and seek to raise his own rewards above what he person-
ally is earning in terms of VFPs. But both he and his group will fail.

He can ignore the real producers of the group and not see that their standard of
living is comparable to their individual production. And he and the group will fail.

He can ignore the nonproducers and the overt product makers and, by so
ignoring them, tear his own and the group’s standard of living to bits.

He can listen to a bunch of PR from a staff member about how valuable that
staff member is and surrender to it without ever really counting up the real VFPs
that staff member is not producing (or even preventing). (It happens.) Only real
VFPs count.

He can work himself half to death without demanding production from others
and have his own standard of living crash.

There are swarms of false data flying about today on this subject. It is taught
in schools, the very best schools; it is heard on the radio and seen on TV and in
the papers. The civilization, as it caves in, is blinded by literally thousands of
false ideas about what and how a standard of living occurs. These, where they
conflict with the basic law, actively prevent one from prospering as they blind
him to the truth of his scene.

In an org or management unit in Scientology, the real VFP is valuable fine
people who produce valuable final products who then make up a valuable fine pub-
lic. Every piece of work and duty in a management unit or an org contributes to
that.

The standard of living of an executive, a management unit, an org or a staff

member is determined by that one basic economic law: The personal production
of VFPs for the group and one’s standard of living are intimately related.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

353
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 8 MARCH 1971R

Remimeo Issue II
REVISED 22 APRIL 1982

Org Series 42
ORG OFFICER

(Originally written by LRH for the Apollo OODs of
8 Mar. 71. Issued as an HCO PL on 27 Sept. 80.)

Org officers think they approach HASes to organize. They don’t.

HCO has not formed because org officers keep making demands on it
instead of doing their job. The organization it takes to get out a specific product
is instant stuff. HCO is a long-term build of the establishment. Entering instant
organization into HCO of course defeats its purposes and prevents it from the
long-haul actions necessary to form a whole org.

If an org officer considered himself the product officer’s expeditor he would
begin to get the idea.

We have a product officer—org officer mission going in to expedite FEBCs.
The product officer will get the product—a competent graduated FEBC on
an airplane going home—being made and fired. The org officer will push the
materiel and lines into shape to back up the product officer. Now, what’s that
have to do with HCO? Nothing.

The org officer makes sure there is a pack or tape or recorder or gets them
(not by despatch) and the product officer checks out, verifies, grooms, solves
FEBC problems, pushes cases.

The Course Super goes on supervising, Course Admin goes on admining.
What they’re doing right with the student gets pushed and done more of. And
what organization there is gets more of from the org officer.

For instance, here is a CO-type prod officer action that was done.

SITUATION: Course numbers building up. You see this in orgs.

HANDLING: Put on a prod—org mission to get numbers completed and fired.

The CO found three who could be made ready to fire at first glance and gave
the order GO-GO-GO, to Action.

The cope was fire three, NOW. The medium range was get a mission on it.

That is uptight production.

354
A prod—org team works in hours and days. Save an hour, save a day. Do it in
hours, do it in days.

By doing it they learn line and materiel outnesses and their reform CSWs of
lines and actions are written up when they’re completed and that’s their first
contact with the HAS and HCO.

Now with these reforms the general org action will be easier and faster and a
product backlog peak won’t occur so fast again.

A prod—org team that writes despatches and harasses HCO just doesn’t
know THAT THE PROD-—ORG SYSTEM IS TO HANDLE BACKLOGS AND
OMISSIONS IN PRODUCTS. Having handled they can advise or order or get
approval for line changes and new recruitment, etc. These, the HAS can get in
for the long haul.

Prod—orgs WORK, they don’t just order.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

355
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 10 MARCH 1971

Remimeo Issue II

Org Series 43

ESTABLISHMENT AND THE HAS

(Originally written by LRH for the Apollo OODs of
10 Mar. 71. Issued as an HCO PL on 30 Oct. 80.)

Ref:
HCO PL 21 July 711 HAS STANDARD ACTIONS

The terminal for staff members and execs to contact when they want person-
nel is the HCO Area Sec (HAS).

They do NOT route this through or to the org officer.
The HAS should work to put an establishment there.

The org officer helps the product officer to get products by organizing the
immediate area being concentrated on so it is smoothly producing.

You don’t write Personnel to get personnel. You write the HAS.
The HAS channels to HCO on such matters.
When the concept of what is an establishment is grasped, all else is easy.

Space, materiel, machines, personnel, hats, lines, control of the org form,
are all establishment. (Org Series 10, Product 1)

The HAS uses Inspections and Reports (Dept 3 HCO) (Stats) to measure the
volume, quality and viability of the establishment so more or less can be put there.
The HAS corrects the establishment using her other depts— Personnel, org board,
comm lines and lines and Ethics.

Until everyone knows what is an HAS and what is an org officer they won’t
be able to direct requests or comms and the system will jam up.

The HAS establishes, forms, puts there, corrects, posts, hats, org boards,
stats, corrects the org. All on a long-term basis.

The org officer organizes production areas for the product officer so they
produce.

The product officer gets the products of the establishment produced or corrects
the products.

356
Org Series No. 10 gives you the four types of products—1, 3, 2, 4. One is
the establishment itself. Three is correcting the establishment. Two is what the
establishment produces. Four is correcting the faulty product of the establishment.

You can organize forever and get no production of valuable final products.

You can produce valuable final products with no organization on a total
cope. But volume, quality and viability will be awful and the overload will soon
overwhelm.

So there are two sides to the coin—organize, produce.
There is long-term, steady, stable, expanding organizing. That’s the HAS.

There is instant, immediate, right-now organizing. That’s the org officer
working with the product officer.

There is hammer-pound, right-now production of products. That’s the product
officer backed up by the org officer close to hand and a bit out in front.

There are also “consumption” officers who get the products wanted outside
and consumed. These are the Dissemination Secretary (Div 2) (old public) and
the Distribution Secretary (Div 6) (new public).

So you have a lineup: Organize an establishment, organize the production
area, produce, get the product wanted and consumed.

It’s all that simple.

On this depends the uniforms, the pay, the facilities, the food, the transport,
personal success, expansion, general success and eventual accomplishment of
large targets.

When these points aren’t understood, then all the shortages and upsets and
confusions you object to occur.

Wherever morale is low, somebody around that point doesn’t dig this or
agree with prosperity.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

357
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 4 APRIL 1972
Remimeo Issue II

Org Series 44
Establishment Officer Series 42
ORG OFFICERS, PRODUCT OFFICERS, ESTOs

(Taken from an LRH advice of 4 Apr. 72.
Issued as an HCO PL on 23 Feb. 82.)

The org officer gets the CO’s programs logged and done. This is in addition
to his FEBC org officer duties, less interviewing staff.

The first product of a product officer is an org officer but the first product of
an org officer was the HAS and is now the Exec Esto.

The first product of an Exec Esto is a Divisional Esto working on Products |
and 3 in the division.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

358
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 DECEMBER 1982

All Orgs Issue I
All Execs

All Staff

All Div Heads

LRH Comms

HCO

Dept | Hats

Dept 3 Hats

Personnel Series 31
Org Series 45

“DOING A QUICKSILVER” FORBIDDEN

Refs:

HCO PL 19 Mar. 71 Personnel Series 20
PERSONNEL PREDICTION

HCO PL 24 June 7OR II PERSONNEL POOLS

Rev. 30.4.75

HCO PL 7 Jan. 66 LEAVING POST, WRITING YOUR HAT

HCO PL 20 Apr. 69 II HATS, NOT WEARING

HCO PL 20 Aug. 71 MUSICAL CHAIRS

HCO PL 11 Aug. 71 I Personnel Series 22
DON’T UNMOCK A WORKING
INSTALLATION

HCO PL 7 Mar. 65 IH OFFENSES AND PENALTIES

HCO PL 13 July 740 Org Series 34

WORKING INSTALLATIONS

There is a condition that can exist in orgs which differs slightly from “mu-
sical chairs” (the rapid transfer of personnel from post to post) but is akin to that
and every bit as deadly.

We could call it a “quicksilver personnel” scene.

(“Quicksilver” is another name for mercury, the silvery-white metallic
element, liquid at room temperature, which is used in thermometers, ba-
rometers and similar instruments. )

Used figuratively, the term ‘quicksilver’ means something that is quick-
moving, unpredictable and as elusive as mercury, or “mercurial.” Something that
is mercurial is changeable, variable, volatile.

To anyone who has ever observed a drop of quicksilver, or mercury, in an
open container or placed on a slab of glass, this will be real. One second it’s
here, the next second it’s there. Just about all you have to do is breathe on it and
it changes its position. And where it was a second ago there’s now nothing.

It is miserable (if not impossible) for an executive or management body try-
ing to run things with staff doing a quicksilver. One can hit up against some
nasty surprises.

359
For example, an org’s personnel scene may look great on the board, with
posts filled, hats existing and known, production occurring and on the rise—all
is looking good when suddenly the stats crash.

An initial check may show there haven’t honestly been any post transfers,
per se. But dig a bit further and you’re likely to find a quicksilver personnel
scene. The top delivery auditor is off on a two-week vacation. The Qual Sec has
been fired on a recruitment tour. The Reg has gone out-ethics and been sus-
pended, unreplaced, pending some ethics handling. The Chief Officer is off on
maternity leave and the CO, holding her post from above, is being the guest
speaker at an event in the next city.

It happens and it happens not only in Class IV Orgs but in the higher service
orgs and management units where tours are essential and missions need to be
fired and other situations can crop up requiring personnel.

It has shown up drastically at times in several large orgs. In one, the head of
a vital network went off on mission and, with no one left being the senior, the
stats in the area crashed. In another, the sales manager took his leave, his routine
functions were ignored and sales suffered severely. And in still another org, no
less than six key delivery terminals were all found to be out on regging tours in
one week, some of them over a period of several weeks, at a time when delivery
of paid-in-full services was backlogged!

None of these terminals had been removed or transferred or promoted. And
one could say the actions being done are all covered in some way in policy, are
needed, and therefore justified. But these terminals were all off post unreplaced,
weren't they?

That’s a quicksilver personnel scene. It’s unstable.

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS

Executives who issue orders that unmock working installations where pro-
duction is occurring at “A” to get something done at “X” bring about such
scenes.

Personnel who, like quicksilver, accommodatingly move off their assigned
posts unreplaced to do something else at the first invitation or order, help to
generate and sustain such scenes.

Seniors who permit or condone this are also a party to them.

Personnel can do a quicksilver for any of a number of reasons. For some, the
chance to go off and see other people and new places may be an alluring pros-
pect. Some are too timid to refuse a destructive order and so they comply, under
protest. For others there is financial gain involved—there are often commissions
or a bonus at stake.

Tours have been used by some, apparently condoned by executives, to take
longer leaves (more time off on leave per year) by combining 4 to 6 or even 8
weeks of a “regging tour” with a “leave,” with the org paying both the person’s
fare and living expenses and no clear distinction made between the period of

360
“tour” and the period of the “leave.” (While this is part of an unstable personnel
scene, it is also a situation requiring a separate ethics handling in itself.)

Sometimes a staff member is made to feel, by a very convincing exec, that
the action which calls for his suddenly going off post with no or inadequate
replacement is actually more important than his job. Where this threatens pro-
duction and there is no adequate replacement, this is almost always a falsehood.

It is true that missions need to be fired. Tours are vital to income and deliv-
ery. Staff sometimes do need to go off post temporarily for handling of one type
or another. Events are valuable in terms of promotion, goodwill, PR and sign-
ups; and for certain types of these, key personnel or trained tech delivery person-
nel may be required. Emergencies do arise. Personnel are entitled to annual
leave. And speed of operations is important.

On the plus side, we do have capable and versatile staff who are willing to
extend themselves, when needed, to make things go right. We have demanding,
fire-breathing executives who are out to handle situations and open up new fields
for delivery which, in itself, is a good thing. And many of these go about it
standardly.

But the senior or exec at any level who endangers ongoing delivery and pro-
duction and/or unstabilizes a producing personnel scene to get these things done
is simply advertising to one and all that he can’t predict and plan and organize or
get others to do so. Control is lacking here as weil as just plain common sense.
The kindest thing one could say about such an exec is that he is short-sighted.
And “quicksilver” is a rather mild term for the staff member who steps so easily
off his post and leaves a hole in the lineup with no thought of the consequences.

One could say that everyone has personnel problems. BUT that is no Why.

HANDLING “QUICKSILVER PERSONNEL” SCENES

The first policies missing in application are those covering replacements and
hat turnovers.

BECAUSE IT IS A “TEMPORARY” ABSENCE, NO ONE IS DEMAND-
ING REPLACEMENT AND TURNING THE HAT OVER TO SOMEONE
WHO CAN COVER THE POST COMPETENTLY.

But policies exist in abundance on this subject. HCO PL 29 Aug. 70 I, Per-
sonnel Series 1, PERSONNEL TRANSFERS CAN DESTROY AN ORG, points
up the outnesses which can destroy an org faster than any others. HCO PL 7 Jan.
66, LEAVING POST, WRITING YOUR HAT, covers the staff member’s respon-
sibility for a post he is vacating under any circumstances. HCO PL 20 Apr. 69 II,
HATS, NOT WEARING, emphasizes the staff member’s responsibility for
knowing that he is the Qual Sec, or Reg, or the post title for the post and func-
tions he has accepted. HCO PL 11 Aug. 71 II, Personnel Series 22, DON’T
UNMOCK A WORKING INSTALLATION, cites the main reason we have ever had
slumps in orgs.

The personnel policies are there. But very often, where a “quicksilver per-
sonnel” scene is permitted, BECAUSE SOMEONE PULLS OFF A SUCCESS

361
IN ONE AREA, EVEN THOUGH STATS IN HIS OWN AREA MAY CRASH,
THE EXISTING ETHICS POLICIES THAT COVER SUCH A CRASH OR
THE COLLAPSE OF AN AREA MAY BE OVERLOOKED OR DELIBER-
ATELY IGNORED.

So how do we handle “‘quicksilver personnel” scenes?
The answer is to add some teeth to the existing policies:

1. AN ABSENCE FROM POST FOR EVEN A TEMPORARY PERIOD
OF AS LITTLE AS HALF A WEEK IS AN ETHICS OFFENSE, UN-
LESS SOMEONE IS NAMED AND THERE AS A REPLACEMENT
WHO HAS HAD THE POST PROPERLY TURNED OVER TO HIM
AND WHO CAN COVER THE POST COMPETENTLY.

2. IF SUCH ABSENCE WITHOUT COMPETENT REPLACEMENT OC-
CURS AT ALL, AN IMMEDIATE COURT OF ETHICS MUST BE
CALLED ON THE STAFF MEMBER WHO LEAVES HIS POST UN-
FILLED OR INADEQUATELY COVERED, AS WELL AS ON THE
SENIOR OR EXECUTIVE ORDERING, CONDONING OR PERMIT-
TING IT.

3. IF IT OCCURS AND RESULTS IN STATS CRASHING IN A COURSE,
A DIVISION, DEPARTMENT, SECTION, UNIT, AREA, ZONE OR
ORG, A COMMITTEE OF EVIDENCE MUST BE CALLED WITH
ALL INVOLVED NAMED AS INTERESTED PARTIES.

The charges are:

CONDONING OR CONTRIBUTING TO CIRCUMSTANCES OR OF
FENSES CAPABLE OF BRINGING A COURSE, SECTION, UNIT, DE-
PARTMENT, ORG, ZONE OR DIVISION TO A STATE OF COLLAPSE

and

NEGLECT OF RESPONSIBILITIES RESULTING IN A CATASTROPHE
EVEN WHEN ANOTHER MANAGES TO AVERT THE FINAL CONSE-
QUENCES.

With this policy made known and enforced, there is a cure for those who do
a “quicksilver” and for executives and seniors whose out-planning and out-
prediction bring about quicksilver personnel scenes.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

362
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 DECEMBER 1982RA
Remimeo Issue II
All Orgs REVISED 21 JANUARY 1991

All Executives
All Management
Personnel

Org Series 46RA
Executive Series 24RA
Esto Series 45RA
Admin Know-How Series 44RA

THE TOOLS OF MANAGEMENT

Refs:
HCO PL 11] Apr. 70 THIRD DYNAMIC TECH
HCO PL 28 July 72 Esto Series 26

Exec Series 16
Org Series 32
ESTABLISHING, HOLDING
THE FORM OF THE ORG
HCO PL 1 July 82 AKH Series 41
MANAGEMENT COORDINATION

There is a simplicity to managing effectively. It begins with the basics of
management.

Although it may appear so to some, successful management is not a highly
complicated, esoteric activity. But, just as an auditor or a C/S must know and be
able to use the exact tools of first dynamic tech in handling cases in order to
achieve exact and standard results on a one-for-one basis, so must an executive
or manager know and be able to use the exact tools of third dynamic tech in
handling groups to achieve successful and exact results in every instance.

Within the wealth of data on third dynamic tech contained in HCO Policy
Letters, the OEC Volumes and recorded LRH lectures and books on the subject,
there are certain definite, specific tools a manager uses. These are the tools of
management.

The difference between brilliant management and mediocre or no manage-
ment, at any level, lies in:

1. Knowing what the tools of management are, and

2. Knowing how to use them.

Many people are not aware that, like a carpenter or any other workman, a
manager uses specific and exact tools. Thus, we see people here and there who

are doing the equivalent of using the handle of a chisel to drive nails into wet
concrete.

363
It is a common fault with inexpert workmen to find them using their tools
wrongly or not using them at all. They make a breakthrough when they discover
what the specific tools are for.

One can see this in people who can’t mix sound or can’t become mixing
engineers. They sit with all these knobs in front of them, reach out and grab
this knob or that one, hoping hopefully something will happen to the sound. Yet
every component they have in front of them is an exact tool to do an exact thing
with sound!

There are a lot of comparisons one could make, but the point is that people
in management positions have precise tools available to them in Dianetics and
Scientology which happen to be far better tools than have ever been available on
the planet.

One can have very good people on management posts who still can drown if
they don’t know and put to use the management tools.

But without these being specified as exact tools, one might not see the sim-
plicity of it.

MANAGEMENT ECHELONS

Operating as it does into an expanding scene, Scientology has grown into the
need for and use of various echelons of management.

In orgs, for some time we have had division heads and above them we have
the Executive Council, headed by the CO or ED of the org.

Above the level of service orgs we have middle management and still above
that we have the Senior Executive Strata of management. And each of these ech-
elons must know the tools of management and how to use them.

The OEC (rg Executive Course) and the FEBC (Flag Executive Briefing
Course) have long been established as the essential courses for training executives
at service org level and above.

These courses, and the OEC and Management Series Volumes upon which
they are based, teach the form of the org and how to use the parts and posts and
functions that go to make up the whole. They give us executives who know how
to correctly utilize staff and their assigned posts and duties. We call it “knowing
how to play the piano” —it’s a matter of knowing what key to hit when and
which keys to use in combination to produce a desired result. (Ref: HCO PL 28
July 72, ESTABLISHING, HOLDING THE FORM OF THE ORG) In other
words, it’s a matter of knowing and using one’s tools. The OEC and FEBC
courses teach this data and much, much more.

While at this writing there are numerous OEC and FEBC grads and more in
the making, thousands more will be needed to handle the current rate of expansion.

Meanwhile an executive at any level and whatever his training needs to know
and use his management tools NOW if he is to function at all.

A div head must “know how to play the piano” within his division.

364
The posts of CO or ED, Chief Officer, Supercargo, Org Exec Sec and HCO
Exec Sec require executives who are capable of “playing the piano” across the
divisions of the entire org and using hats and posts and functions correctly in
order to achieve immediate production from the org as a whole.

At middle management one is handling not one function nor only one org
but many orgs and their functions, which requires “knowing how to play the
piano” at that level.

And at the Senior Executive Strata of management, we get into the vital need
for ‘knowing how to play the piano” across a much wider sphere, using the full
scope of management tools and using them with high skill. One might be using
the same tools as lower stratas of management but a higher level of expertise is
required as one’s planning, decisions and actions are influencing far, far broader
areas.

What has brought this about is the rapid expansion of Scientology into wider
zones of responsibility and therefore increased responsibility with a resultant in-
crease in traffic. This naturally has to be handled by increasing efficiency. What
it has done, in effect, is push some up from lower-level management status to
upper-level management status, necessarily. Without realizing it, some executives
have been climbing a status stairs in terms of influence and zones of control.
And they can go only so high without being terribly precise in their use of tools.
After that, without this acquired precision, they drown.

The obvious answer to all of this is an executive training program which
instant-hats executives on the fundamental tools of management and provides
Management Status checksheets through which an executive or manager raises
his status by becoming more and more expert with these and an even wider range
of tools. And such a program has now been developed!

MANAGEMENT STATUS CHECKSHEETS
The new executive training program consists of three status levels.
These levels are to be covered in a series of Management Status checksheets.

The Management Status One checksheet has a prerequisite of Staff Status II.
It instant-hats an exec on the basic tools of management, such as:

The Admin Scale, target policy, strategic plans, programs, specific lines and
org terminals, org boards, despatches and telexes, statistics and graphs, con-
ditions, hats and hatting, files, personnel folders, ethics folders, etc. Each
one is a specific tool.

The Management Status Two checksheet (with an OEC prerequisite) consists
of a profound review of the basic management tools and study of the upper-level
tools of management, which include:

Surveys, PR, pilots, review of past performance, general economics, finance
systems, cost accounting, control through networks, admin indicators, morale,
legal, goodwill, exchange, missions (Action missions), economical manage-
ment and managing by dynamics.

365
The Management Status Three checksheet (with FEBC prerequisite) would
be a more profound review of the basic and upper-level management tools, in
addition to training on the twelve ingredients of expansion upon which the Senior
Executive Strata operates.

Even an OEC or FEBC grad would do the Management Status checksheets
as, when he comes out of an OEC or FEBC, all in the clouds, the Management
Status checksheet is needed to bring him back down to earth and tell him he’s
dealing with tools which are very finite tools.

What is being communicated to executives by these checksheets is that they
have tools, what the tools are exactly, and that they must use them.

EXECUTIVE STATUS LEVELS

There are specific requirements to be met by a manager to attain each of the
three Executive Status levels.

Working up through these status levels, a manager not only becomes more
proficient in handling an org, any org, but becomes fully certified to operate at
middle or senior echelons of management.

The Executive Status levels are:

1. EXECUTIVE STATUS ONE: At this level, the person is simply thrown
on post, the basic management tools are put into his hands via a brief,
rat-a-tat-tat Management Status One checksheet and he then gets on with it.

2. EXECUTIVE STATUS TWO: For one to be certified at this level, one
must have completed the OEC, done the Management Status Two check-
sheet and have an adequate production record.

3. EXECUTIVE STATUS THREE: For one to be certified at this level, he
must have completed the FEBC, done the Management Status Three
checksheet and have a proven production record.

When the steps for Executive Status certification are complete, the exec must
present adequate evidence of such to the Qualifications Division. After verifica-
tion of the evidence, he is awarded the appropriate Executive Status certificate.

By use of these Executive Status levels, executives at management levels
could see what executives they had (or not had). The designation “ES I”’ (Execu-
tive Status I) would tell them at once what they were dealing with, etc. Also,
from the viewpoint of the individual, he would know where he had to go to get
an upper-level rating.

Once these Management Status checksheets are issued, middle and central
management personnel should not draw full pay or be bonus eligible until they have
completed the Management Status One checksheet, as they will not be operating
effectively until they have done this.

EXECUTIVE STATUSES AND STAFF STATUSES

The Exec Status levels do not replace Staff Status training. All staff and
execs are programed and move up the Staff Statuses so as to have a better idea of

366
the org as an org; these levels are also indicative of the training and experience
of a staff member and show his promotion eligibility.

An executive should attain Executive Status One by completing the Manage-
ment Status One checksheet as soon as possible upon assuming post, so he has
the management tools available for his immediate application.

Once an exec attains Staff Status VI (Org Exec Course graduate), he can
attain Executive Status Two by fulfillment of the requirements listed above. An
FEBC graduate achieves Executive Status Three in a similar fashion.

SUMMARY

With the release of the new Management Status checksheets, precise and
gradient training levels for all echelons of management will exist comparable to
the precise and gradient training levels required for all echelons of technical
delivery.

Quite an unbeatable combination!

One winds up with managers fully familiar with their exact tools, having the
one-two-three of management tech at their fingertips, and “knowing how to play
the piano” effectively across an org, a continent, a planet!

So the answer to current expansion is an action which is geared to bring
about even further expansion. And that is the only way to go!

It begins with the basic tools of management.
L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Revision assisted by
LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

367
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 31 JULY 1983R

Remimeo Issue I
All Orgs REVISED 21 JANUARY 1991
All Execs

All Management
Personnel

Org Series 47R
Executive Series 26R
Establishment Officer Series 47R
Admin Know-How Series 48R

BASIC MANAGEMENT TOOLS

Refs:
HCO PL 29 Dec. 82RA Org Series 46RA
Rev. 20.1.9] Exec Series 24RA

Esto Series 45RA
AKH Series 44RA
THE TOOLS OF MANAGEMENT
HCO PL 31 July 83 II Exec Series 27
Esto Series 48
AKH Series 49
Org Series 48
MANAGEMENT TOOLS BREAKTHROUGH

The following is a list of the materials which, out of the many tools of man-
agement, comprise the BASIC MANAGEMENT TOOLS.

1. ADMIN SCALE: A scale for use which gives a sequence (and relative seniority)
of subjects relating to organization. The scale, from the top down, includes:
Goals, Purposes, Policy, Plans, Programs, Projects, Orders, Ideal Scenes,
Statistics, Valuable Final Products. The scale is worked up and down until it
is (each item) in full agreement with the remaining items. In short, for suc-
cess, all these items in the scale must agree with all other items in the scale
on the same subject.

2. TARGET POLICY: A series of policy letters which describe each type of
target and how they are to be used by staff, executives and management
personnel to get something done.

3. STRATEGIC PLANS: A STRATEGIC PLAN is a statement of the intended
plans for accomplishing a broad objective and inherent in its definition is the
idea of clever use of resources or maneuvers for outwitting the enemy or
overcoming existing obstacles to win the objective. It is the central strategy
worked out at the top which, like an umbrella, covers the activities of the
echelons below it.

4, PROGRAMS: A PROGRAM is a series of steps in sequence to carry out a
plan. Programs are made up of all types of targets coordinated and executed
on time.

368
. PROJECTS: A PROJECT is a series of guiding steps written in sequence to
carry out one step of a program, which, if followed, will result in a full and
successful accomplishment of the program target.

. ORDERS: An ORDER is the direction or command issued by an authorized
person to a person or group within the sphere of the authorized person’s
authority. It is the verbal or written direction from a lower or designated
authority to carry out a program step or apply the general policy. Some
program steps are so simple that they are themselves an order or an order
can simply be a roughly written project. By implication an order goes from
a senior to juniors.

All orders of whatever kind by telex, despatch or mission orders must be
coordinated with current written command intention. You can destroy an org
by issuing orders to it uncleared and uncoordinated. Coordinate your orders!
Clear your orders!

. COMPLIANCE REPORTS: A COMPLIANCE REPORT is a report to the
originator of an order that the order has been done and is a completed cycle.
It is not a cycle begun; it is not a cycle in progress; it is a cycle completed
and reported back to the originator as done.

When an executive or manager accepts “done” as the single statement and
calls it a compliance, noncompliance can occur unseen. Therefore, one must
(1) require explicit compliance to every order and (2) receive the evidence of
the compliance pinned to the compliance report. Such evidence might be in
the form of copies of the actual material required by the order and procured,
or photographs of it, ticket stubs, receipts, a signed note stating the time and
place some action was carried out, etc. Evidence is data that records a
‘“‘done” so somebody else can know it is done.

It is up to LRH Comms, Flag Reps or execs to verify reports of dones or get
dones done. True compliances to evaluated programs are vital.

. TERMINALS: A TERMINAL is something that has mass and meaning which
originates, receives, relays and changes particles on a flow line. A post or
termina] is an assigned area of responsibility and action which is supervised
in part by an executive.

A fixed-terminal post stays in one spot, handles specific duties and receives
communications, handles them and sends them on their way.

A line post has to do with organizational lines, seeing that the lines run
smoothly, ironing out any ridges in the lines, keeping particles flowing
smoothly from one post to another post. A line post is concerned with the
flow of lines, not necessarily with the fixed-terminal posts at the end of the
lines.

. LINES: A LINE is a route along which a particle travels between one terminal
and the next in an organization; a fixed pattern of terminals who originate and
receive or receive and relay orders, information or other particles.

A COMMAND LINE is a line on which authority flows. It is vertical. A
command line is used upward for unusual permission or authorizations or
information or important actions or compliances. Downward it is used for
orders.

369
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

A COMMUNICATION LINE is the line on which particles flow; any se-
quence through which a message of any character may go. It is horizontal.

The most important things in an organization are its lines and terminals.
Without these in, in an exact known pattern, the organization cannot func-
tion at all. The lines will flow if they are all in and people wear their hats.

ORG BOARDS: An ORG BOARD (ORGANIZING BOARD) is a board
which displays the functions, duties, sequences of action and authorities of
an organization. The org board shows the pattern of organizing to obtain
a product. It is the pattern of the terminals and their flows. We see these
terminals as “posts” or positions. Each of these is a hat. There is a flow
along these hats. The result of the whole org board is a product. The product
of each hat on the board adds up to the total product.

HATS: HAT is a term to describe the write-ups, checksheets and packs that
outline the purposes, know-how and duties of a post. It exists in folders and
packs and is trained in on the person on the post to a point of full application
of the data therein. A HAT designates what terminal in the organization is
represented and what the terminal handles and what flows the terminal
directs. HATTING is the action of training the person on the checksheet and
pack of materials for his post.

TELEXES: A TELEX is a message sent and received by means of telex ma-
chines at specific stations hooked up with one another. This is a fast method
of communication, similar to a telegram or cable.

Use telexes as though you were sending telegrams. Positiveness and speed
are the primary factors. Cost enters as a third. Security enters as a fourth
consideration. All have importance but in that order.

Telexes must be of such clarity that any other person in the org can read and
understand them. You must take responsibility for both ends of a communi-
cation line. Write your communication (telex) so that it invites compliance or
answer without further query or dev-t. Entheta in telexes on a long-distance
comm line is forbidden.

Don’t use telexes when despatches will do. Nonurgent communications on
telex lines jam them. Do NOT put logistics (supply) on a telex line. Telex
lines should only be used for communications concerning operations.

DESPATCHES: A DESPATCH is a written message, particularly an official
communication. When writing a despatch, address it to the POST—not the
person. Date your despatch. Route to the hat only, give its department, sec-
tion and org. Put any vias at the top of the despatch. Indicate with an arrow
the first destination. Sign it with your name but also the hat you’re wearing
when you write it.

As with telexes, despatches must be written so clearly that any other person
in the org can read and understand them, with the originator taking respon-
sibility for both ends of the communication line. And, as with telexes, entheta
in despatches on a long-distance comm line is forbidden.

STATISTICS: A STATISTIC is a number or amount compared to an earlier
number or amount of the same thing. STATISTICS refer to the quantity of

370
17.

18.

work done or the value of it in money. Statistics are the only sound measure
of any production or any job or any activity. These tell of production. They
measure what is done. Thus, one can manage by statistics. When one is
managing by statistics they must be studied and judged alongside the other
related statistics.

. GRAPHS: A GRAPH is a line or diagram showing how one quantity de-

pends on, compares with or changes another. It is any pictorial device used
to display numerical relationships.

. CONDITIONS: A CONDITION is an operating state. Organizationally, it’s

an operating state and oddly enough, in the MEST universe, there are several
formulas connected with these operating states. The table of conditions, from
the bottom up, includes: Confusion, Treason, Enemy, Doubt, Liability, Non-
Existence, Danger, Emergency, Normal, Affluence and Power or Power
Change. There is a law that holds true in this universe whereby if one does
not correctly designate the condition he is in and apply its formula to his
activities or if he assigns and applies the wrong condition, then the following
happens: He will inevitably drop one condition below the condition he is
actually in. One has to do the steps of a condition formula in order to im-
prove one’s condition.

PERSONNEL FOLDERS: A PERSONNEL FOLDER is kept in HCO for each
person employed by the org. The folder is to contain all pertinent personnel
data about the person: name, age, nationality, date employment started, ad-
dress (if other than the org), next of kin, social security number, test scores,
previous education, skills, previous employment, case level, training level,
name of post, former posts held and dates held, production record on post(s),
date employment ceased, copies of all tests, and any other pertinent data.

Copies of contracts, agreements or legal papers connected with the person
are filed in the personnel folder. The originals of such papers are kept in the
val doc files.

A personnel folder is used for purposes of promotion and any needful reor-
ganization and so should contain anything that throws light on the efficiency,
inefficiency or character of personnel.

Personnel folders are filed by division and department in HCO, with the
personnel in separate folders filed alphabetically in their department. There
should be two sections in the personnel files: (1) present employees and (2)
past employees.

ETHICS FOLDERS: An ETHICS FOLDER is kept in HCO for each individual
staff member. It is a folder which should include his complete ethics record,
ethics chits, Knowledge Reports, commendations and copies, as well, of any
justice actions taken on the person, such as Courts of Ethics or Comm Evs,
with their results.

Filing is the real trick of Ethics work. The files do 90 percent of the work.
Ethics reports patiently filed in folders, one for each staff member, eventu-
ally makes one file fat. When one file gets fat, call up a Court of Ethics on
the person and his area gets smooth.

371
19. FILES: A FILE by definition is an orderly and complete deposit of data
which is available for immediate use. As FILES are the vital operational
line, it is of the GREATEST IMPORTANCE that ALL FILING IS ACCU-
RATE. A misfiled particle can be lost forever. A missing item can throw out
a whole evaluation or a sale. It is of vital interest both in ease of work and
financially that all files are straight.

20. DATA SERIES: The tool to discover causes. The administrative technology
described in these policy letters is applied to find what is logical by ferreting
out what is illogical, using this to reveal the greatest outness which, when
remedied, will resolve the scene.

There is considerably more data on each of these tools contained in the
policy letters in the OEC Volumes and Management Series Volumes, none of it
complicated or difficult to grasp.

The purpose of this policy letter is simply to advise the exec that these are
his tools—his most fundamental and basic management tools. And that they are
for USE and it is VITAL that he USE them.

Why? Because use of these simple, basic tools means the difference between
a failing org and a flourishing one.

And we want organizations to flourish!
L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
Revision assisted by

LRH Technical Research
and Compilations

372
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 31 JULY 1983

Remimeo Issue I]
All Orgs
All Execs
All Management
Personnel

VITAL—IMPORTANT

Org Series 48
Executive Series 27
Establishment Officer Series 48
Admin Know-How Series 49

MANAGEMENT TOOLS BREAKTHROUGH

Refs:
HCO PL 29 Dec. 82RA Org Series 46RA
Rev. 21.1.9] Exec Series 24RA
Esto Series 45RA
AKH Series 44RA
THE TOOLS OF MANAGEMENT
HCO PL 31 July 83R1 Org Series 47R
Rey, 21.1.91 Exec Series 26R

Esto Series 47R
AKH Series 48R
BASIC MANAGEMENT TOOLS

THE FIRST THING AN EXECUTIVE OR MANAGER AT ANY
LEVEL NEEDS TO KNOW IS THAT HE HAS TOOLS WITH WHICH
TO MANAGE.

This applies to top levels of management, to middle management echelons
and in every org from the CO or ED down through the Exec Council and every
head of a division or department.

BREAKTHROUGH
This datum is the result of a recent, eye-opening breakthrough.

The breakthrough was not a matter of discovering or developing or improving
the materials which make up the tools of management. Org boards, the Admin
Scale, target policy, planning and programing, statistics, graphs and conditions
(to name a few of these tools) have been a part of our technology, well defined,
available for use and used for quite some years now.

THE BREAKTHROUGH WAS IN DISCOVERING THAT A GREAT MANY
EXECUTIVES DID NOT LOOK UPON THESE AS TOOLS.

373
But unless one does recognize them as tools, unless one actually puts them
in the category of tools, like rakes and shovels and wheelbarrows, he is apt to
think of them as opinions or theories or something of the sort. He won’t recognize
that he does have actual tools with which to manage. And, not realizing this, he
won’t USE them in managing.

Such a scene could be compared to somebody building a house who didn’t
even know he was trying to build a house and, should this be pointed out to him,
he would look at hammers and saws as if they were total strangers. He wouldn’t
wind up with a house.

Any activity has its tools. And if one is going to engage in an activity, he had
better know what its tools are and that they are for use.

BASIC MANAGEMENT TOOLS

We are rich in management tools but the most fundamental of them, required
for use at any executive level from the highest to the lowest, are these:

ADMIN SCALE

TARGET POLICY

STRATEGIC PLANS

PROGRAMS

PROJECTS

ORDERS

COMPLIANCE REPORTS

ORG TERMINALS

SPECIFIC LINES

ORG BOARDS

HATS AND HATTING

TELEXES

DESPATCHES

STATISTICS AND GRAPHS

CONDITIONS

PERSONNEL FOLDERS

ETHICS FOLDERS

FILES

DATA SERIES.

Each of these fundamental tools is defined and covered briefly in HCO PL
31 July 83R I, BASIC MANAGEMENT TOOLS.

None of these are complicated. They are actually SIMPLE but VITALLY,
VITALLY IMPORTANT.

One gets some terminals, gets them some lines, gets the channels of com-

mand and echelon worked out, gets in strategic planning and with that one can
achieve some coordination.

374
But it is necessary to be able to conceive of purpose (which, in target policy,
becomes objectives). And it is necessary to be able to write targets that will
accomplish that objective or that purpose. To get the targets done one needs lines
and terminals there. And to have lines and terminals, of course, one has to have
an org board.

SIMPLE. But VITALLY IMPORTANT.

In laying out these tools we are laying out the fundamentals of organization
as that, most definitely, is what these tools are. And these tools will give one an
organization. Without them, you don’t have an organization, you have a mob.
And if one cannot figure out purpose or objectives or write targets and telexes
and get hatting done and hats worn they’ll just keep on being a mob. But correct
use of just this basic list of management tools can turn a mob into a producing
organization!

EXEC STATUS ONE CHECKSHEET

A fast, instant-hat type of checksheet called Exec Status One is being pro-
vided to swiftly train execs and managers at all levels on these tools.

This is not a substitute for an OEC or FEBC. But it is vital that an exec
starts using these tools right now, instantly and at once yesterday, if he considers
himself an executive or is in a position of handling an organization of any type,
size or kind. Because if he doesn’t use these tools, he’s going to lay an egg.

ETHICS

Once the exec has passed this first checksheet, Exec Status One, it’s an ethics
offense to fail to use these tools properly. One would handle a first or second
offense with cramming, but after that it’s a Court of Ethics and, in the case of a
person having trained on these tools continuing to misapply or not apply these
tools, it becomes a matter for a Comm Ev.

SUMMARY

1. First, an executive or manager must know that actual TOOLS EXIST for
his use in managing.

2. Second, he needs to know WHAT his tools are.
3. Third, he must realize that these tools are SIMPLE but VITALLY,
VITALLY IMPORTANT, that they are for USE and he must USE THEM.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

375
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 18 JUNE 1985
Remimeo
All Executives
Product Officers
Org Officers
Establishment Officers
Cramming Officers Org Series 49

Executive Series 30

PRODUCT ORIENTATION

Refs:
HCO PL 14 Sept. 70 Org Series 2
COPE AND ORGANIZE
Tape: 7011C17 SO “First Talk to the FEBC Students”
FEBC |

One of the primary duties of a product officer is to look around and find
some production to do.

On an executive post, the formula one operates on is 50 percent production
and 50 percent organize. When the organize is superlative and is very well done
(while remaining only 50 percent of the time spent by the executive), it eventually
gets up to 75 percent production and 25 percent organize. This is approximately
the ideal scene.

OVER-ORGANIZE

Organization is a vital activity. However, when the amount of organize time
starts outweighing the production time, it is an indicator of other outnesses. The
purpose for organizing in the first place is so that production can occur. In an
area of organize-organize-organize, one will always find crashing Mis-Us, false
data, overts and withholds. In other words, these are the things which turn people
into fiddle-fiddle organize.

Organize time should not exceed 50 percent of a person’s post time. Cram-
ming and drilling fall under the category of organize, and the 50-50 rule applies
here as well. The solution to a flubbing staff member is not to put him onto full
time drilling or cramming. The person should do his correction actions for half a
day and be put on the job in some capacity the other half of the day so that he
stays accustomed to the scene. Otherwise, the person is liable to get stiff and
have trouble getting back onto post when he does finish his correction. Study,
and even cramming, is actually an award. What about the guys that are doing all
the work? Wouldn’t they like to have a full day of cramming too?

KEEPING PRODUCTION ROLLING
It is the responsibility of the executive to keep his staff busy producing.

Many people don’t like to be executives because they always have to be ran-
sacking around making sure staff are producing, and finding things for them to

376
do. But personnel are actually put at risk when they aren’t kept in production. A
big company which suddenly dismisses a lot of personnel simply has shiftless
executives who have not found things for the personnel to do.

Even if major production in a particular area is temporarily stopped for some
reason, other related (or different) products and subproducts can be found for the
staff to do which can be done with existing resources.

As an example of this, suppose one had a movie production company whose
camera was out for repair. Though they wouldn’t actually be able to put anything
on film, there would still be cycles which could be done in the meantime. They
could be rounding up props, rehearsing actors, and making sure all the other
actions which will be needed to complete that film are done.

It is not a slight matter to overlook things like this because somewhere up the
track, in the midst of heavy rush production, suddenly one of these overlooked
cycles will pop into view and stall the whole line while it is done on an emer-
gency basis.

SUMMARY

The trick of the product officer is to find blank periods and things to put in
them. If one gets conditioned to thinking this way, it becomes a very easy job.
Otherwise, it’s all panic.

Product orientation is very important, as in the long run, it protects the
worker and it gets the show on the road. One can’t totally produce or totally
organize at any given time. It takes an average between production and organize
to keep things going. But the whole point is to keep things going, and keep
products rolling out.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

377
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor. East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 8 NOVEMBER 1979

Remimco

Estos

All Orgs

All Management
Personnel

(The following data was taken from an LRH despatch of 8 Nov.
79. In that same despatch LRH instructed that this data be put
into a policy letter so the lost tech of the prod—org officer
system and Esto system would be recovered. This LRH instruc-
tion was recently found and thus is being issued on 5 Mar. 96
as a policy letter just as LRH instructed.)

Establishment Officer Series 52

Org Series 50
LOST TECH
Modifies:
HCO PL 9 May 74 PROD-ORG, ESTO AND

OLDER SYSTEMS RECONCILED

[ve just realized that the Esto and the prod—org system, both of which were
successful in their day, have been. totally dropped. One executive apparently had
a confusion on the two systems and could not reconcile them and so stopped
pushing both of them. That is my Why for some org failures.

The prod—org system was enormously successful and has been dropped. The
Esto system had limited success and has been dropped. The reason for the failure
of the Esto system was earlier isolated—the Supervisors let the Esto trainees fake
their way through their study of the subject. They just didn’t study the subject and
then went around running into walls. This was true even though they were given
heavy intensive training on it. They didn‘t do the training.

This comes up because of a cram done on this executive which states that he
could never reconcile the two systems and has had a confusion on them. This
definitely must have shown up during his tenure as an executive and it brings to
mind right this minute that the prod~org system and the Esto system may never
have been pushed in. This executive violated the normal actions of prod—org and
org establishment. But this bares the fact that management and orgs may not be
pushing either the prod—org system nor the Esto system and this could, in large
measure, account for the fact that orgs in some cases became disestablished and
ceased to produce and deliver.

The exact goof which this executive made is important to understand—he
put the Service Product Officer” over the Esto and made the Esto the org officer
of the Service Product Officer, and hoped from this that his org would be
established. Of course it wouldn’t be established at all because a product officer’s
org officer normally specializes in disestablishment—org officers have tended
mainly to tear up the org in the name of production. That is by our experience.
An org having an Esto, recruits up an Esto corps. That is the only thing that will
get posts filled and hatted.

These two systems must be represented on any org board. The product
officer must be on those org boards, the product officer’s org officer must be on

“Editor's Note: Per HCO PL 30 Nov. 82. THE DEPUTY CO OR DEPUTY ED FOR DELIVERY AND
EXCHANGE. the post title of Service Product Officer was changed to D/CO or D/ED for Delivery and
Exchange.)

© (996 L. Ron Hubbard Library
All Rights Reserved
HCO PL 8.11.79 -~2-

those org boards. And the Executive Esto must be on those org boards. Otherwise
these systems will continue to be submerged.

I mention this in order to get into action both the prod—org system and the
Esto system. They must be called strongly to attention, otherwise they will go on
being neglected.

This could be a major downfall of management and orgs if one just ceased to
push these two successful points.

Thus I am calling to your attention the fact that you should use these systems
so that we can recover this lost tech.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Compilation assisted by
LRH Technical‘Research
and Compilations
THE PERSONNEL SERIES
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 AUGUST 1970

Remimeo Issue I
Dept | Hat

HCO Area Hat

Exec Sec Hats

Dept 13 Hat

Dept 14 Hat

Qual Sec Hat

Personnel Series J

PERSONNEL TRANSFERS
CAN DESTROY AN ORG

It is an observation that personnel, by critical definition, is “that function
which creates havoc in one place in an org by trying to solve a personnel mess in
another.”

Example: We have just gotten in our Div 6. It has two people. The org has
been suffering for lack of Div 6 actions. Now we’ve finally got two people there
and they are being trained up. Meanwhile there is a shortage of staff in CF.
Personnel “solves” the CF problem by transferring those in Div 6 to CF in Div 2.
There goes any progress on Div 6.

By solving one problem, another is created.

Also there is the fact that it takes a while to train someone on a post and get
the post in order. So rapid transfers defeat any post training or competence.

We call this action ‘musical chairs.” That is a game in which people rapidly
change positions.

So these transfers defeat not only the org on the third dynamic but also the
individual on the first dynamic.

An earlier action similar to this went on. Then whenever Tech got an auditor
trained up, Personnel would transfer the auditor to an admin post.

As the auditor was tech trained and not OEC trained, you began to find
auditors in charge but they didn’t have any admin training, thus shattering, by
ignorance, the org form and defeating the org’s production.

I’ve just seen a case where a staff member went on full-time training Class
VI (very expensive) and was made HCO ES on his return. But had never had an
OEC.

Using the Tech Divs as a “personnel pool” and taking tech people for
admin posts thus defeats twice—defeats the org as a producing activity and
defeats its form by not training people in admin (OEC) when they are going to be
used in admin.

381
These personnel errors (or crimes) cause every staff member to suffer in
terms of lowered income, lowered pay, lowered facilities, lower success. I doubt
there is any org where these errors (or crimes) are not current at this writing.

To give the HCO ES candidate full-time training on the OEC or FEBC would
make sense. Not Class VI! If you reverse it, youll see what I mean: we give a
new staff member an OEC only and put him onto auditing. Of course that would
be disastrous. It’s just as disastrous the other way around—taking an auditor who
is a Class VI but not an OEC grad and making him the HCO Area Sec!

There is an optimum executive who is both an experienced, trained admin-

istrator (OEC and time on org posts) and an auditor. But an org would have to be
in high production with lots of auditors before that could happen.

ERRORS

These errors are of long duration. They happen over and over. And they do
more to destroy an org than any other action.

A. Making a hole in one place to remedy a hole in another.
Training a person for tech but not admin and putting him in admin.
Using the Tech Divs as personnel pools from which to man other divs.

Rapid shifts of post.

moO oO 8

Leaving areas in an org unmanned.

SOLUTIONS

The reason why these things are done all come under the heading of failures
to recruit and properly train.

Org expansion often gets pinned by false economy in personnel. “If we hired
anyone else, we would get less pay.” This completely overlooks the fact that if
the org doesn’t hire more people it will go broke. An org has to be of a certain
size to be solvent; it has certain basic expenses such as rent which makes it cost
just so much to run. Yet personnel can be so poorly thought out that the org is
kept at starvation level.

I heard one not long ago which takes a prize, “But we don’t need an Advance
Registrar. We can’t afford one anyway. You see we have pcs booked in advance
for ten weeks already as we don’t have enough auditors, so why should we have
any further promotion?” An idiot smile went with this of course. Backlog became
“advance registration.”

Orgs in various ways fix their income and prevent its increase. First and
foremost of these is personnel.

In every org where I have acted as Executive Director, I have had a person-
nel procurement problem. In each case the problem was internally created. First
I would get, “Well, units are low. . . .” or “Nobody ever applies.” I would take
it from there. I finally became very clever at these impasses. “‘What,” I would

382
ask the Receptionist, “do you tell people who come looking for a job?” Cunning.
“Oh them!” I would get, “I tell them we aren’t hiring of course.” I would set up
a line from a specially appointed personnel person to me only and would shortly
have enough people. I have run an org from eight people to sixty-three in thirty
days and its GI from 50 pounds to 3,000 pounds in sixty days. Just by doing the
usual. It created awful problems of course, like auditing rooms, classrooms, hand
grooving people onto posts—it was busy. The favorite graveyard calm, so adored
there before that, got shattered to hell!

I concluded many times then and conclude now that it is a characteristic
of an org to refuse new personnel and to keep them off. In approaching this
problem in an org, I am afraid experience has taught me to begin with that
assumption and handle it from that viewpoint.

So I normally set up a line that can’t be stopped and get people on post.
Then I force in training on posts. And I personally inspect and talk to every
section every day about what they need and how it’s going and keep up their
section production.

LRH Comms tell me they can’t get execs to inspect their areas daily. And
personnel shortages show that others do not blow the lines open on recruiting and
even prevent handling.

So here is one area where I do some things in managing a production org
that not many others do:

1. Force recruitment.

2. Train on post.

3. Daily inspection and comm with everyone in the place in his post area.
4. Concentrate on section and individual production.

5. Let people finish the job they are on.

The result of all this has uniformly been sky-high stats, sky-high pay, huge
reserves and excellent tech produced.

So these are the magic solutions.

I do NOT empty out tech to fill admin. I do NOT encourage transfers. I do
NOT create problems in one area by transferring to another. I will NOT accept
that no one applies for jobs. And I don’t wreck one project by grabbing people
off it to start another. I FIND NEW PEOPLE.

IMPOSSIBILITIES

Behind every “impossibility” lies some great big WHY which if not found,
keeps things messed up. One area that “couldn’t get any auditors” had expelled
60 percent of the field from the Church! Another area had dismissed 50 percent
of staff every time the income dropped. Another area cut the staff’s pay very low
and then made it go lower each time the gross income fell. Another “never could
find the right people.”

383
Sometimes internal squabbles are given a much higher importance than the
org itself.

Some areas use “social acceptability” instead of stats to handle personnel.

Whatever the reason an org isn’t getting on, it is internal. It isn’t some other
org or some senior management body. It’s right inside that org. Further, it has to
do with personnel mishandling.

Any org, at any time, has not given as much quantity of service as the public
demanded. If you continued to expand at the rate of demand, giving very high
quality of service mind you, the org would expand to hundreds or even thousands
of staff members.

Somewhere, when that doesn’t happen, personnel mishandling has cut off
the expansion.

So when we look this over, we find that quality of delivered product deter-
mines how much it will be in demand and that the only thing which will limit an
expansion to meet that demand is personnel procurement, training and stability
on post, getting the staff to produce and holding the form of the org and making
it go.

When personnel commits the errors (or crimes) mentioned here and when
management fails to do the (1) to (5) listed above that I do in an org, there will
be a halt.

True, an org is complex. True, quality is hard to maintain. True, one has to
work. But unless personnel procurement and handling is IN, all else will fail. So
that’s the weak spot.

An undermanned division will empty.

An undermanned org will pay badly and go down.

The point to handle is personnel.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

384
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 AUGUST 1970

Remimeo Issue I]
Dept | Hat

HCO Area Hat

HCO ES Hat

Dept 13 Hat

Personnel Series 2

PERSONNEL PROGRAMING

If personnel are not programed, you get chaos.

The subject of personnel carries with it always the subjects of training and
experience and suitability.

Dept 13 has been created to permit personnel to be ‘“‘enhanced” or im-
proved.

This is done by programing.

HCO should make known what it will need in the org in the next year. How
many of what kind it now has.

Dept 13 must work out what programing is now needed. It posts a board,
puts the names on it and sees that part-time study will occur and be followed for
the next post. It sees that this will be made.

HCO by looking back over some period of expansion will be able to forecast
what will be needed more easily. Anyone in the org is usually aware of the un-
dermanned points that exist and the unfilled posts, as they get hit with them
continually. So if HCO doesn’t know what these points are by record, it is easy
to do a survey.

With an inefficient HCO which has not recruited and programed, the org
is already starting well behind the gate and is already howlingly undermanned
and undertrained. Yet to solve all this by instantaneous transfers will unmock
the lot.

The RIGHT way to do it is to:

1. Count up what you have.

2. Figure out where they will be promoted to.

3. Program them on part-time training and

4. Recruit.

385
5. When recruits are on, get them genned in fast on the lower posts so they
can operate.

6. Shift the programed people to the posts for which they have been pro-
gramed.

7. Begin to train up the recruits with part-time programing.
8. Recruit.

This does not mean you shift every post in the org. It does mean your more
experienced people are the ones that go up.

Various rules go with this:
TRY TO KEEP TECH TRAINED PEOPLE IN TECH.
TRY TO TRAIN ADMIN PEOPLE FULLY FOR ADMIN.

There are ways to waste enough training time to crash your org. Train a
person to Class VI, put him in Public Divs. Train up a PES and transfer him to
tech training. All sorts of goofs can be made in programing, all of them costly
to the org, all of them defeating the objects of Personnel Dept | and Enhance-
ment Dept 13. One obvious way is to train somebody up with no contract or
note. But the main one is not to program at all and just rattle around as a total
effect.

Part of the action by Dept 1 is to beat down all the reasons why we can’t hire
anyone. I recently reviewed an area where personnel problems were desperate.
Five to ten people a week were applying. Only one to two were “suitable,” what-
ever that meant. That ratio is wrong. Eighty percent unsuitable? Ten percent
maybe, not eighty percent.

The area Dept 13 has to beat down is arranging work so no part-time
study can occur. Only about twenty percent of a staff won’t study. Nearly ninety
percent will handle their post if it’s overloaded rather than study, which is okay.
But putting somebody on Day and Foundation and putting one man on a 10,000
name Address Section to keep it up and in use are the usual reasons for no study
time.

This comes together between Dept 1 and Dept 13 AND IS AN INDICATOR
THAT DEPT 1 IS GOOFING ITS RECRUITING ACTIONS.

Dept 3, Inspections, or the Executive Secretaries or Secretaries can also foul
up both Dept 1 and Dept 13. By not inspecting and not running on and by stats,
these salt the org down with idling people. So you see Dept 22, let us say, with
six people and no production while the Treasury Sec has to work every night to
handle an undermanned Dept 8.

The answer is stats, honest stats for everyone.

386
You can get a situation where you have enough people in the whole org to
run an org but a third are overloaded and the rest dev-ting around. That’s where
there is no stat watching and no daily area inspections or executive interest.

I know of one org that has forty-four on staff doing the work and potential
service load of about seventy-five. Naturally they can’t take time off to study so
they can’t be programed. Yer the stat situation is not watched or used nor is the
place inspected, so the production is about a twenty-person org and no funds
exist to pay forty-four much less seventy-five. The clue is that it’s all manned
except for Tech! The customers are there in droves. They can’t get service. So
no pay.

It is silly situations like this that occur when personnel are not programed.
Two years ago the above org did not train anyone, worked as a clinic and would
not even audit staff. All its auditor contracts expired. HCO and the OES sat there
in a fog and let it happen. There was no Dept 13 to program anyone.

So here is a new angle to the recruitment problem. HCO is faced with the
vital necessity of recruiting trained auditors NOW. Yet at this writing hasn’t even
sent around a bulk mailing to ask field auditors to drop in.

DEPT 14

So this is where Dept 14 gets into the act. It is a problem in org correction.
If even Qual is empty, it’s all an OES function. The correct solution is to force
recruitment of trained auditors, force recruitment of ordinary applicants and
program it in Dept 13 to train up new auditors as well.

THE REMEDY

You should realize that no matter how rough the problem looks, it involves
recruitment and programing. Instant transfers can utterly wreck an org. Yet, in-
evitably, “transfer!” is all you hear when a solution is required to org production
failures.

I think this comes in from the world of “psychology.” Maybe labor unions.
If a man isn’t doing well on a post, you transfer him. It assumes that each person
has “aptitude.” It never changes so you fit the post to the person by finding a
new post. That’s really nonsense. You can actually more profitably fit the person
to the post.

Only when programing has failed (or doesn’t exist) does one resort to transfers
to solve personnel problems. Of course experienced, able people get promoted.
But unless they are programed and trained, watch out! He was a fine CF clerk
and a lousy Dissem Sec. Why? It isn’t his personality. It’s that nobody trained him
to be a Dissem Sec. He wasn’t programed.

It’s cruel to promote a person and let the guy fall on his head.

Transferring because somebody doesn’t do well is discipline, it is not “adapt-
ing people to jobs they can handle.”

387
There is quite an awful jolt in losing one’s post. Never think there isn't.

Promote—demote occurs when the person is not programed. Therefore the
new Dept 13.

Therefore this Personnel Series.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

388
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 AUGUST 1970

Remimeo Issue III
Dept | Hat

HCO Area Sec Hat

Exec Sec Hats

Dept 13 Hat

Dept 14 Hat

Qual Sec Hat

Personnel Series 3

RECRUIT IN EXCESS

I have always followed a doctrine of hiring or recruiting in excess.

There is a heavy turnover in personnel. There are many stresses in human
society.

You lose people from all ranks, particularly toward the top. Early on, for
instance, I never could keep a secretary. Because she’d been my secretary, she
could get a big-pay job (one of them $10,000 a year) from a bigwig. Or some
young man had to marry her (and divorce her when she was no longer so glam-
orously placed). Anyway she was trained and had become an executive secretary.
The only one I know of who didn’t go UP had a commie husband making sure
she went down.

So the higher they go:
A. The more altitude they have that has market value, and
B. The more stress that hits them and blows them apart.

This is true of auditors. You’ll lose three times as many Class VIIIs as you
lose Class VIs. You'll lose three times as many Class VIs as you do Class IVs,
etc. And you’ll lose more auditors than you will admin people.

Therefore you have to be very careful indeed who you send for full-time,
expensive technical training. You have to ask these questions:

Is the candidate a uniformly good HDC auditor?

B. Is the candidate scheduled for a technical post?

C. Is the candidate a fast study by record?

D. Is the candidate uninvolved with anti-Scientology or non-Scientology
connections such as wife or family?

E. Is the candidate out of personal debt?

F, Does the candidate have a good record of keeping his promises?

G. Is the candidate willing to sign a new contract and note?

389
H. Have the candidate’s stats been high on post or especially in auditing?

I. Does the candidate stay with the org and not go into franchise?

If the answer to all these is emphatically yes there is a chance that the org
will benefit. If any of these are no, or if any are even maybe, then don’t do it.
Find somebody who will be able to get a YES on every one. They are more
numerous than you suppose.

This is also true for highly specialized admin training. The same list, except
for B (and is scheduled for an admin post and is a candidate for higher org
admin training), applies rigorously.

Failing to establish these things first and getting it all understood, you can
find yourself with all such funds expended and no highly trained personnel either.

LOSSES

The percentage of loss or incompetence discovered is hard to establish but is
remarkably high. In the decade from 1960 to 1970 personnel turnover was quite
heavy even in orgs that were booming.

During that time staff staff auditing was at a minimum. The orgs were jittery
under psychiatric inspired attacks. Dianetic tech was not in use until mid-1969.
From 1966 to 1970 Scientology tech was quickie and the Grade and Class Chart
not followed. Pay, after I ceased to be Executive Director, was low. Therefore
you can make a list of things that have to be in hand to reduce heavy turnover.

1. Audit staffs well and train them for staff status.
2. Keep PRO area control in, in areas and in the org.

3. Use Dianetics heavily and teach it well.

4. Keep all Scientology tech materials in action with tapes and all materials
and books in full use, well used, well taught.

5. Keep personal and sectional, departmental and divisional stats high.
6. Keep the org recruited up.

7. Keep personnel programed.

8. Hold the form of the org.

9. Deliver an excellent, flubless product.

10. Work for volume of training and processing as the org’s product.

As recruitment was also neglected and as contracts expired without being
filled, we can add:

11. Over-recruit always.

390
If you have an idea you will need 20 people in the next six months, you had
better take on at least 40 and you will have your 20. And double is a low figure.

LINEAR RECRUITING

A firm hires a girl to write their letters. After 60 days they find she doesn’t
do her job. So they get rid of her and hire another. And in 90 days find she
can’t do her job. So they fire her and hire another. . . . That’s 150 days of no
correspondence. It’s enough to ruin any firm. It’s costly.

SIMULTANEOUS HIRING
A firm hires three girls feeling they need one.
At the end of 150 days they have one girl.
But they had 150 days of correspondence. And a profit.

The economical answer in terms of saved profit is keep up the production.
Don’t fixate on personnel. Always do multiple personnel procurement.

In actual practice when you do this, you seldom fire anyone. They blow off
or they were actually needed.

If people are let go, you don’t just brush your hands of it. You in an organi-
zation can let them continue being programed while they hold an outside job, fix
them up, get them trained and hire them later.

Modern society is very loose-footed. The state pays them not to work
(apparently only). The society is suppressively oriented. The push and pull of
personal relationships is poor.

You are edged in upon a society of dying cultural values, encroaching drugs,
threatened annihilation.

No one out there feels very safe.

This insecurity leaks into the org and people get pushed around or push
people around.

Real or fancied wrongs occur.
People are rather timid really.

And the more the society buys the idea it’s a world of tooth and claw, the
more it becomes so.

All this reflects into the picture of personnel.

You have to really work to keep orgs manned and trained up.
You do this by:

A. Running a very good org

B. Delivering an excellent product

391
C. Keeping a steady inflow of new personnel
D. Training and processing well those you have.

If the (1) to (11) are in, in the org, then EXPANSION occurs and, losing
hardly anyone, you have to scramble to keep up.

As the INCOME OF THE ORG DEPENDS WHOLLY ON ITS GDSes
(Gross Divisional Statistics) and as these are wholly under the control of the org,
then it’s obvious that the only finance trouble or pay trouble an org can have is
by undermanning, undertraining and underproducing.

No great international GI slump has ever occurred unless there has been a
long GDS slump. So it’s obvious that an undermanned org is asking for a cave-in.

Much of this has been learned in recent years.

At this writing there is little or no recruitment by HCOs and training of
staffs could be better.

But the lessons we learn, we learn and apply.

And so it is with personnel.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

392
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 30 AUGUST 1970

Remimeo
Dept | Hat
HCO AS Hat
ES Hats
Dept 13 Hats
Dept 14 Hats

Personnel Series 4

RECRUITING ACTIONS

The first thing one has to handle in recruiting is the willingness of an org
staff to have new people as staff members.

New people tend to cut pay down, they stretch internal staff services thinner,
they are not yet “with it” and create a lot of dev-t. Ethics problems rise. Dead-
wood goes overlooked. Staffs have a certain esprit and élan and aren’t all that
willing to confer it.

Some orgs plug along on a fixed inadequate gross income, refusing to recruit,
losing old staff by contract expiry or graduating to higher orgs or general wear
and tear.

They have a sort of horror of green staff members. One can’t blame them—
files get upset, comms vanish, body interruptions go high, one gets overloaded
just handling the dev-t generated.

BUT THERE IS A WAY TO HANDLE ALL THIS.

HCO PL 4 Jan. 66, PERSONNEL—STAFF STATUS, and Staff Status 0, I,
II and III take care of these faults.

All this is programed in LRH ED 121 Int, 29 Aug. 70, STAFF TRAINING
PGM NO. 2, which is a part of this series.

Taking on new staff has to be done. Otherwise the org will not expand; that
which stays the same shrinks and the org faces collapse.

So recruitment is a vital necessity.

To overcome any objections, one makes sure that HCO PL 4 Jan. 66, STAFF
STATUS, is IN. Otherwise the place becomes a maelstrom. It is gotten in by the
LRH ED, STAFF TRAINING PGM NO. 2.

RECRUITING POOLS

HCO PL 24 June 1970, PERSONNEL POOLS, lists proper personnel pools
for a Dianetics or Scientology organization.

This covers areas for recruitment and gives ways to do it.

The main thing, the most important thing, is that IT HAS TO BE DONE. It
doesn’t just happen.

393
Any organization or activity has to recruit and it has to train.

The dream of the industrialist and even the modern agriculturalist is an ac-
tivity which is totally automated (automatically run by machinery not people).
The more “overpopulated” the world becomes, the more the bigwigs dream
about automation. I had a psycho editor once (cured him of being psychotic but
never cured him of being an editor) who used to dream up civilizations where the
machines were even repaired by machines.

The lovely part of machines is that they are supposed to be invariable in
action. Each part meshes smoothly with every other part.

If you conceive of a machine made out of human beings instead of metal
parts, you see at once that the parts are not exact nor are they perfectly adapted
to each other.

This is the fact about beings that dismays the industrialist. The parts don’t
fit, they vary, they have ideas of their own.

The “parts” also drop out of the “machine.”

Any old-time personnel system seeks to fit the people into the “machine”
composed of people or fit the “machine” to the people.

All these systems were based upon a psychological principle that no person
ever changed or got better.

Also the idea was that people’s social order as it existed was the basic social
order. (That the existing departure from the ideal scene was the ideal scene. See
the Data Series policy letters.)

Thus it was conceived that an organization composed of human beings re-
quired perfect human beings or it wouldn’t run at all. But there are no perfect
human beings.

In “straightening an organization up” there is a belief that one must get rid
of all its imperfect beings.

And this can go so far as to refuse to try out or let in any beings who are not
perfect.

When things get to this pass, one is looking at the probable death of an org.

In real life only a small percentage of people are “unsuitable.” They come
in four general classes:

a. Those who are destructively antisocial (suppressive persons).

b. Those who are connected with the destructively antisocial outside the
org (potential trouble sources).

c. Those ill, diseased or in some way unable to function.
d. Those who are active enemies sent in by active enemies to harm the org.

Anyone hiring should be familiar with the HCOBs covering suppressive per-
sons and HCOBs and policy letters concerning potential trouble sources.

394
He should also be familiar with testing procedures:

1, E-Meter tone arm position and needle manifestation (HCO PL 26 Aug.
66, ETHICS E-METER CHECK),

2. IQ tests,

3. Aptitude tests,

4. Leadership score,

5. Oxford Capacity Analysis,

6. The Chart of Human Evaluation (Science of Survival).

These skills and procedures are part of the Hubbard Consultant (HC) Check-
sheet.

Using this technology, one minimizes the entrance onto staff of persons who
will upset the place.

If no reasonableness (faulty explanations) enters into this, the 10 percent who
would enter disturbance into the place are eliminated.

If this barrier is put up and held up, then the people brought in on staff will
not upset anything.

Following the Staff Status procedure, one grooves them in.
And all is well.

If this procedure is NOT followed rigorously, the org will become educated
into resisting new staff or recruiting. If it IS followed rigorously, the place will
smoothly expand.

BEGINNING HIRING

To begin a cycle of recruitment, one must first apply all the test procedures
to all on the existing staff and compare it to production records.

This is important. In one case where scores of green personnel were re-
cruited, the place was very upset. The whole organization blamed the new recruits.
BUT THE TROUBLE WAS COMING FROM THREE PERSONS ALREADY
THERE—two were on drugs, the third was a suppressive of a classic kind and
these three blocked all training and processing of the new recruits! The three
eventually blew off, people got trained and processed and the whole org went
upstat. There were no undesirables amongst the new people! They were just so
battered around and left so untrained that they were made to look bad!

Any org which has lost a lot of staff and has failed to recruit had hidden in it
someone who should have been screened out!

So one is looking for a small percentage. He is NOT trying to find perfect
people!

With that small percentage screened out, one can make recruits into valuable
staff members.

395
Whenever I see ‘80 percent were unsuitable” I really raise an eyebrow.
Wrong percentage. When I see “we dismissed 50 percent” I raise the other eye-
brow. Wrong percentage. Ten percent yes. Fifty to 80 percent no.

So when I see figures like that, I know that the screening is taking place in
the wrong area. Somebody already IN is blocking others out and getting rid of
them.

The test is not PAST. The test is what the E-Meter reads (no questions, just
what is the read). What’s the IQ, leadership, aptitude and Oxford? Where does
he sit on the Chart of Human Evaluation?

If that’s all okay and the personnel is IN now, what’s his stat of production?
What’s his study stat? What’s his case gain?

And that handles that. Without much trouble. Without opinion. Without any
oppression or threats.

THE CHARACTER OF MAN

You see, man is not a savage beast at all. He is rather timid. He is easily
alarmed.

His symptoms of revenge grow out of his fears.

His basic nature is social, not antisocial. He is not an animal. He likes to
communicate. He actually would like to be friends. Rebuffs and upsets and failures
to understand him and efforts to harm him can make him hide under a mask
of aggression. And this, when it gets too bad and is wrong, is apt to drive him
crazy.

If he isn’t crazy, he is decent and tries to do his best.

That he put a foot wrong is unimportant. Will he put his foot right? ts all ]
ever care about.

Discipline and punishment and threats can go far too far and can upset him
very badly rather than crowd him “into line.”

When madmen are amongst him he responds badly, is upset and becomes
turbulent. Protected, he acts well and behaves well and is constructive.

A lot of experience is talking. I’ve even made great crews out of people the
government had made into convicts.

A very few have gone so wrong that only huge amounts of processing would
ever repair. In personnel recruiting and training they have to be audited so long
that they are only cases, not personnel. They cause upsets for too long a period
before they are handled as cases to be trusted.

They are not even natively bad. They think they are psychiatrists or wolves
or vultures or something. They are crazy and think they have to kill or destroy.

People closely connected to them are a bit psycho as they go into terror.

396
When any weeding out goes further than this, it is a bad mistake, upsets an
organization, blows people off and is itself oppressive.

THE TOOLS

You have to realize that we have precision tools. If we lose them or don’t use
them we get into trouble.

For a long while the E-Meter as a personnel instrument was out of use in the
test battery. The Chart of Human Evaluation was laid aside. The Oxford Capacity
Analysis was not used.

And personnel errors almost destroyed several orgs.

The tools we have tell the story well. They can be disregarded; opinion,
police record, social acceptability, etc., get put into use instead and we are for it.
Those are the OLD tools that failed.

But to use the tools we have, one has to realize they are precise tools. One
doesn’t get a bad needle on a personnel and explain it away. It’s a bad needle (a
rock slam or a dirty needle or a stuck needle or a stage four needle). It means we
are dealing with dynamite.

We can handle it in processing. We can bring the person up to a valuable
person IF WE ARE PROCESSING THE PERSON AS A PC.

But we are discussing staff members. We are discussing PRODUCTION. We
are discussing hiring personnel.

Only about 10 percent fall into an unacceptable category. And they too can
be saved. BUT WE DON’T WANT THEM AS PART OF AN ORG STAFF.

You see, there are two different things here. One is CASES. The other is
PERSONNEL.

When a person knows he can handle offbeat cases, he tends to get careless
about cases being offbeat as personnel. AND IT’S A NEAR FATAL ERROR.

It costs the org its calm, staff members their pay and deprives the area of
full use of the product.

So it’s quite an overt to overlook the niceties and technology of personnel
and goof it up.

A very bad off case on staff can actually cause enough trouble to blow off
and bar out all good staff.

Bad recruits can make a whole org allergic to any recruits.

It’s up to those in charge of Personnel to get trained as HCs and act accordingly.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

397
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 10 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Personnel Series 5

TRANSFERITIS

A survey of personnel on posts who would ordinarily be considered for
transfer brings to light certain factors which underlie WHY they are failing on
post even while seeming to work at it.

People on personnel posts in companies have followed a 19th-century psycho-
logical approach that if a person can’t do one post he can be transferred to an-
other post to which he is better “adapted.” “Talent,” “native skill,” all sorts of
factors are given. But if a person with all things considered in the first place is
then found to do badly on that post, the second think of 19th-century personnel
was to transfer him to another post and yet another and another. The third think when
again he fails is then to fire him.

Transferring under these circumstances is usually not only wrong for the
person but strews the error all through the org.

The HCO PL 24 June 70, MANAGEMENT CYCLE, gives an answer to
“has to be transferred.”

CAMOUFLAGED HOLES

A “camouflaged hole’ means a hole in the org lineup that appears to be a
post. Yet it isn’t a held post because its duties are not being done. It is therefore
a hole people and actions fall into without knowing it is there. It can literally
drive an org mad to have a few of these around. Camouflaged means “disguised”
or made to appear something else. In this case a hole in the lineup is camou-
flaged by the fact that somebody appears to be holding it who isn’t.

Let’s take a Receptionist who doesn’t receive and route people. You will
find the people in the org being fouled up by this. They all have to act after the
fact of no Reception. This makes them handle Reception in the midst of a mess
of Reception goofs. But there appears to be a Receptionist. If there were NO pre-
tended Receptionist, people would at least know this and keep an eye out. But as
there ‘‘is a Receptionist” who isn’t a Receptionist, all Reception actions have to
be handled by others each time after there has been a goof! Guaranteed to mess
up the environment and strain tempers more than somewhat.

An executive post is much harder to detect. Those below it are not aware of
the skills the post needs and are only aware of trouble. Yet it easily can be just a
camouflaged hole.

Given the fact that one is not dealing with a sick person or a scoundrel (any

398
post requires that a person be fairly healthy and with a clean ethics record), for a
person to be on a post and not doing it, he or she must be suffering from one or
more of the following conditions:

l.
2.
3.

Never trained up for the post in the first place (per Management Chart),
Never grooved in on the post purpose,

Unreality or unfamiliarity with the ideal scene in its practical aspects,
resulting in omitted data or a missing scene.

Furthermore, for a person to remain on a post under these conditions he/she

must:

a.
b.

c.

Be unaware of their lack of knowledge,
Blame it on another or

Have considerations about status (i.e., it would be damaging to their
reputation for it to be found out that they didn’t know).

This last point, status, puts any post flub onto a WITHHOLD basis resulting
in continuously deteriorating performance each time it occurs.

In actual fact in each one of the cases examined, one or more of the above
points were evident in greater or lesser degree. My suggested remedy would be:

I.

Thorough training as deputy before putting any person on a major post.
The purpose being to familiarize the person with actual working conditions.

A clear, approved statement of post purpose must be written in the front
of the post hat write-up, which is easily comprehensible and simple.
This post purpose is then cleared to F/N in Qual before the person can
be considered fully on post.

Once on post the person must constantly maintain and increase their
working knowledge of their appointed areas of responsibility and study
and familiarize themselves with old and new HCOBs and PLs as they

apply.

That they undergo a competent examination from time to time on the
duties and actions of their post as they exist or are extended.

That to this end any poor performance on post be reported to Div 5,
Dept 13 for investigation and correction by examining the above points
and putting in those found out.

That within the framework of Cases and Morale policy letter, priority
be given to those posts in the org that most likely could be expected to
collect a “status value” so that the integrity of those holding such posts
be maintained.

That in any case, notwithstanding the above paragraph, persons on such
posts should make every attempt to keep themselves clean of O/Ws,
including making it known to the proper terminals when they find they
have misunderstoods or missing data on post.

399
If there is any trouble in training a person up for a post, it will be traced
ordinarily to LACK OF ADEQUATE MATERIAL about that post and no check-
sheet to be thoroughly checked out on.

This should be checked as a point.

It is common not to have a pack of data or checksheet for a post and, if so,
one must be made.

SUMMARY

Given a person on post not producing, TRANSFER is almost never the right
answer. Yet it is the one most frequently done.

If a person is morally unfit, a criminal or mad, it is obvious that “transfer”
is the wrong answer.

So this leaves us with these actions to do:

As given in the Management Cycle, HCO PL 24 June 70.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

400
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 12 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Personnel Series 6

TRAINING

By actual test and practical experience, a fully-trained, on-policy executive
will raise the stats of an org.

An untrained executive will depress the stats.

An officer trained on the Flag Executive Briefing Course will send stats up
where an equivalent officer not so trained will send them down.

This appears so obvious that it can be missed.
It means that it costs an org thousands upon thousands to use an untrained
executive who has not done an FEBC. It costs personnel their pay, their facilities

and their security.

If an FEBC cost $30,000 (which it does not), the org would make it back in
a few weeks.

If an untrained executive is placed in charge of an org, it can prepare for
losses and can succumb.

This is a very simple lesson. It is a matter of actual fact, not of PR.

This is shown up well when a fully-trained executive is placed in charge of a
whole org.

It is less visible but just as decisive regarding ANY post.

An untrained person on a post will be at best somebody not too destructive
and at worst a camouflaged hole.

These facts are facts.
When you do not know this, be prepared to have lots of trouble, losses and dev-t.

It costs money not to spend money pretraining for a post. It also costs money
not to train a person on a post to familiarize him with it.

Training is of course a relative word. The materials taught must be practical
and useful and must apply to the job to be held.

Given this, a Personnel Officer who does not advise or provide for full pre-
post training will be found to be very costly.

401
One who insists on full pretraining and on-post training will be found to be
a very valuable asset.

This data is not theoretical. It is the living truth.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

402
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 13 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Personnel Series 7

HATS—VITAL DATA

I can prove conclusively and utterly that any down statistic traces at once to
two points:

1. Failure to hire or recruit.

2. Failure to train people on their hats.

Regarding training, the failure of any executive is traceable to three points:

A. Not making up a checksheet for the posts of juniors under him.

B. Not making up a pack for the checksheet and a hat for each junior.

C. Not fully training his juniors up on their hats as per A & B.

To do all this an executive must himself be trained.

HAT— means the duties of a post. It comes from the fact that jobs are often
distinguished by a type of hat as fireman, policeman, conductor, etc. Hence the
term HAT.

A “hat” is really a folder containing the write-ups of past incumbents on a
post plus a checksheet of all data relating to the post plus a pack of materials that

cover the post.

One also has a “staff hat’ which is to say a folder containing all his duties
as a staff member, the org itself and its lines and purposes.

There is also a hat folder for general or technical directives issued to all the
staff regardless of post.

So there is a:
Post Hat
Staff Hat
Tech Hat

for every staff member.

403
Before Personnel transfers and begins a musical-chair parade, it is well to
inspect and see if:

a. The post has all these hats and knows them,

b. The post’s senior has actively provided them and checked them out or
had them checked out on the junior.

If (a) and (b) are not true then J can assure you Personnel will be replacing
and musical-chairing forever.

It well may be that the executive is the trouble, not the incumbent.

A senior who does not see to full hats in the possession of juniors and does
not see they are fully checked out is a liability.

ANY ORG’S TROUBLES CAN BE TRACED TO THESE TWO POINTS.

Therefore one must be very sure that seniors take responsibility for the hats,
checksheets, packs and know-how of juniors.

A successful executive is one who understands:
1. Organization,
2. His own hat, has a checksheet and pack for it and knows these,

3. That he is at extreme risk if he does not enforce hat, checksheet and
pack checkouts on his juniors.

ANYONE WHO HAS JUNIORS UNDER HIM IS A TRAINING OFFICER
FOR THOSE JUNIORS AS A VITAL ADDITIONAL DUTY.

So really, Personnel, if you want to know who your executives are, find one who:
i. Has been trained,

ii. Who produces well himself,

ii. Who enforces hats, checksheets and packs on his juniors, and

iv. Trains his juniors as per (iii).

There you have an excellent executive, if not an executive director.

It is a cruel, vital, total truth that you normally can trace the reason for
inefficient areas in an org or company to:

1. Lack of hiring or recruiting,
2. Lack of trained executives,

3. Lack of executives who will assemble hats for and train their juniors.

404
An organization is a third dynamic technology.
When the hats aren’t known or worn, it’s a mob.
A division which blows up or unmocks is usually:
1. Undermanned,

2. Unorganized,

3. Untrained.

Whenever a senior on the line of command fails to see to the hats and full
training of his juniors you have a total breakdown.

Personnel sees this in terms of hiring and firing and transfers.

Look into any area that can’t keep its people and you find not enough people
or untrained people. And you for sure will also find an executive who WILL
NOT train his people, see that they have post hats and checkouts.

The solutions are pretty obvious.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

405
Remimeo

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 16 SEPTEMBER 1970

Personnel Hats

Ethics Hats

Personnel Series 8

ETHICS AND PERSONNEL
(Applies to E/Os)

Personnel can be harassed by utilization failures.

Demands for personnel are usually met by an inspection of the area (dept or
div or activity) that is demanding the personnel.

A personnel demand received by Personnel is properly routed to the Ethics
Officer with the following request:

“Dept (or activity) = CCC's: assing for percnneell.

“Please check these points.

“A.
“B.
“C.
“D.

“FB

SR

“G,
“H.

Are existing personnel there busy?
Have there been recent blows from that area?
Are their mest and comm lines in good condition?

Do the personnel in that area each have HATS, FULL
CHECKSHEETS FOR POST AND AREA?

Does the senior officer of that area have and support a
program for training and grooving in his personnel?

Have the personnel now on post been ill (PTS)?
Is there an SP in the area by meter check?

Is study and auditing time arranged for?

“Please note by HCO PL 16 Sept. 70, ETHICS AND PERSONNEL, that if
D and E above are out and no vigorous action is in progress to get these two
points in, a Comm Ev should be convened.

“Please let me have a report on this area so that I can expedite needful
personnel or demand utilization of existing personnel.

“Personnel I/C”

UTILIZATION

An area which does not make hats, checksheets and packs for its staff mem-
bers and does not vigorously groove in and get personnel on purpose lines and
knowledgeable will cause endless trouble for Personnel Recruitment Officers and
Personnel Control Officers.

406
An area can get into this hideous cycle:

Recruit

Don’t train

Don’t groove in
Don’t utilize
Apply heavy ethics
Lose personnel
Demand personnel
Don’t train

Don’t groove in
Don’t utilize
Apply heavier ethics
Lose personnel.

It will just keep on and on and on.

The staff member who goofs is NOT the proper Ethics target. The correct
Ethics target is the divisional officer or department head who does not hat,
checksheet and pack and train on them and groove in on post every personnel he has.

In some areas this failure is not sloth or “no time,” but a solid great big
WON’T TRAIN.

As the area subjected to this is downtone and poor imaged and overloaded,
the job of recruitment is made nearly impossible.

PURPOSE AND CRIME

A breakthrough in the know-how of civilization is that a thetan evidently
considers any beingness better than no beingness.

This would explain how people cling to an even painful existence and why
even a slave or prisoner does not just drop a body.

Beingness is valuable.

A post or job is enormously valuable. Even the most minor post has a status
value.

The only quality that is critical about a job is, can it be held at all? By heavy
overload and harassment a job can be made untenable. But a “blow” or depar-
ture is only occasioned by hope of a better one elsewhere in this same life. A
workload can be heavy. But when it gets impossible, one gets a blow.

An overloaded division will empty.

The most common way to overload an area is to fail to hat, checksheet and
pack the personnel and not train them. Then they work badly as a team with lots
of friction as the jobs are not meshed with one another. Dev-t results. An appar-
ency of hard work ends up in poor or little production.

Then personnel begin to make goofs which absorb the time of other personnel.

Not only this but A PERSONNEL WITHOUT PURPOSE CAN COMMIT
CRIMES.

407
The secret of a turbulent society is contained in these facts.

A welfare state pays people not to work. It is paying to have people without
purpose or hats. Therefore it gets crime. There is NO surer way to beget an
insurgent society than to deny purpose and posts to its members.

Knowingly or unknowingly, welfare statism is aimed at disenfranchising
citizens. From Rome on forward, every welfare state has eventually erupted in
revolt and civil war. And every state which denied jobs or status has blown up in
revolt. The French and Russian revolutions were fully concerned with breaking a
monopoly of status.

However you view it or however it was done, FAILURE TO PROVIDE
JOBS, PURPOSE AND TRAINING ON JOBS BEGETS REVOLT.

Unhappiness, social misery, are not answered by denying in any way actual
useful jobs.

The sense of belonging and purpose in living can be strangled in many
ways.

Whenever it is done, it is done by some mechanism (like the dole or relief or
plain unemployment) which prevents participation.

Participation is only achieved by the worthwhileness of the activity, the fac-
tualness and understanding of the activity, explained purpose and an exact and
trained-in set of duties.

Crime stems totally and entirely from lack of belonging and understanding
that to which one belongs. The criminal or juvenile gang is a substitute for society. It
is an outlaw pack at the throat of that which forced it not to belong.

Preventing youthful participation, permitting airy-fairy education, unreal val-
ues and lack of understanding turns youth against the state.

Politicians and financiers have been too deficient in imagination to provide
real jobs, real training, real objectives. It is easier to toss contemptuous starvation
handouts to the multitude. Or lock them out entirely.

The wages of such action are revolt and social decline.

There is work and thought needful in providing:

A worthwhile cause

Valuable production

Jobs and status

Uf

Real education for the posts held
E. Perpetuation of a valuable activity.

Any businessman for various reasons tries to do this. He is usually overbur-
dened by the state.

408
In Russia, where there is only the cynical state, police duress is all that
holds the rickety framework together.

Thus there is a direct coordination between (a) social disorder and (b) no-job
or no-hat or no-training on it.

ETHICS AND HATS
Wherever Ethics has to be heavy you find:
1. No real hats
2. No checksheet or pack
3. No thorough grooving in.

Given a worthwhile cause, Personnel can be made a near impossible post by
neglect of grooving in.

When a person is unable to wear a hat, processing can trace back the cycle
of attaining status and losing it until the person can have a hat.

Personnel placement is far less important than on-the-job hats, checksheets
and packs grooved in.

Promotion follows any good production in due course.

This is how Ethics and Personnel work together or conflict.

If Ethics does not target those who fail to train rather than those who aren’t
trained or processed and goof or commit crimes, Ethics and Personnel both will
come a resounding cropper.

In support of what I say, Ethics can trace any trouble in an area back to a
failure to recruit and fully, realistically train on posts.

And Personnel can trace any trouble in an area to past failures to recruit and
fully, realistically train on posts.

You have here in an org what has been destroying all of man’s civilizations
—denying jobs and status, failing to groove in and train. Man has only had force
and Cossacks to remedy these lacks when what he really needed was imagina-
tion, jobs and training.

A full appreciation of this solves many riddles regarding social planning and
societies.

In our own sphere we must use this understanding well and drive the social
aberrations out of our orgs and keep them out by recruiting, hats, checksheets,
packs and full training for every post and the sweeping removal of all blocks and
barriers which prevent it.

409
A man wants to belong. He can’t if he does not know the purpose of that to
which he belongs and all the duties and actions of his post.

So make it so by recruiting, training and processing that he can belong and
be valuable.

And by having upstat orgs, make it so the public can come in, get service
and also belong by membership.

If you understand this fully, we can triumph, for it is a know-how few other
men have.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

410
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 22 SEPTEMBER 1970

Remimeo
Exec Hats
Personnel Hats
Ethics Hats

AN URGENT IMPORTANT AND STAR-RATE PL

Personnel Series 9

Org Series 4

HATS

HAT—A term used to describe the write-ups, checksheets and packs that
outline the purposes, know-how and duties of a post. It exists in folders and
packs and is trained in on the person on the post.

HAT TECHNOLOGY

“Hats” developed in 1950 for use in Dianetic orgs as a special technology.
The term and idea of “‘a hat” comes from conductors or locomotive engineers,
etc., each of whom wears a distinctive and different type of headgear. A “hat”
therefore designates particular status and duties in an organization.

A “hat” is a specialty. It handles or controls certain particles in various actions
and receives, changes and routes them.

A “hat” designates what terminal in the organization is represented and
what the terminal handles and what flows the terminal directs.

Every hat has a product.
The product can be represented as a statistic.

Any job or position in the world could have its own hat. The reason things do
not run well in a life, an org, a group, nation or the world is an absence of hats.

The reason why an org runs well when it does is hats.

Any protest of anyone against things not running right can be traced to lack
of hats.

Any slump an org goes through can be traced directly and at once to an
absence of one or more hats being worn.

HAT CONTENT
A hat must contain:

A. A purpose of the post.

411]
Its relative position on the org bd.

A write-up of the post (done usually by people who have held it before
relief and when so done it has no further authority than advice).

A checksheet of all the policy letters, bulletins, advices, manuals, books
and drills applicable to the post. (As in a course checksheet.)

A full pack of the written materials or tapes of the checksheet plus any
manuals of equipment or books.

A copy of the org bd of the portion of the org to which the post belongs.
A flow chart showing what particles are received by the post and what

changes the post is expected to make in them and to where the post
routes them.

. The product of the post.

The statistic of the post, the statistic of the section, the statistic of the
department and division to which the post belongs.

STAFF HAT

There is also a general staff hat.

This hat contains:

a.

b.

The overall purpose of the org, its aims, goals and products.

The privileges or rewards of a staff member such as auditing, training
on post, general training availability, pay, vacations or leave, etc.

The penalties involved in nonproduction or abuse of post privileges or
misuse of the post contracts.

The public relations responsibilities of a staff member.

The interpersonal relations amongst staff members including courtesy,
cleanliness, attitudes to seniors and juniors, office etiquette, etc.

The mest of posts generally, its papers, despatches, files, equipment.

The comm and transport system of the org.

GRADIENT SCALE OF HATS

A “gradient scale’ means ‘“‘a gradual increasing degree of something.” A
non-gradient scale would be telling someone to enter a skyscraper by a 32nd
story window.

Thus there is a gradient scale of organizing.

A key to this is found in The Problems of Work’s theory of confusion and the
stable datum.

412
One in actual practice has to cope while organizing.

COPE means to handle whatever comes up. In the dictionary it means “to
deal successfully with a difficult situation.” We use it to mean “to handle any old
way whatever comes up, to handle it successfully and somehow.”

IF YOU REMAIN IN COPE, THE DEMAND TO COPE INCREASES.

In that you have the key to “‘exhausted executives” or staff members. You
have why the president of the US ages about 20 years in one term of office as
you can see by comparing dated photographs of past presidents. He is totally on
cope. His government has an org board that looks like a pile of jackstraws. He has
no hat. His staff have no hats. His government departments have no hat. The
technologies of economics, law, business, politics, welfare, warfare, diplomacy,
have been lost or neglected (they do exist to some extent).

The guy is on total cope. And the post has been on total cope since it was
created as an afterthought by the Constitutional Congress that began the post in
the 18th century. Even what it says in US civics textbooks is not found in practice.

So “difficult situations” are the order of the day and are handled by special
actions and appointments.

The people who should handle them haven’t got real hats.

This is all catching up with the country at this writing to such a degree that
the citizen cannot benefit from a stable society or social order. The country looks
more like a war of insurgency.

In other words departures from hats has led into total cope and it is steadily
worsening.

Any organization put in by one political party is knocked out by the next
incumbent, and who could totally organize a country in 4 years? (The term of a
president.)

Yet it is hanging together some way and some way meeting increasing de-
mands and pressures.

I have stated this in a large example so that it can be seen in a smaller unit.
To handle this one would first have to want to straighten it out and then
assemble the tech of admin to straighten it out. And then one would have to

begin on a gradient scale of org bd and hats.

A cope sort of hat would be tossed-off orders to some other people on staff
who have some title of some sort.

Along with this would be a posted org bd that has little to do with duties
actually performed and used by a staff that doesn’t know what it is.

One begins to move out of cope (as given in other series) by putting an org

board together that labels posts and duties and getting people on them to handle
the types of particles (bodies, mailings) of the org.

413
The next action would be brief write-ups of the posts and their duties and
checking people out on them.

Actually if you only got to the middle of the last paragraph with an org the
executives would remain in cope. So much know-how would be missing in the
org’s staff that every rough bit would shoot up to the executive for special han-
dling. And that is cope.

Hats only in this far is not good enough as it still takes a genius to run the place.
The next gradient scale is to get the hat to contain:

1. The post write-up itself

ii. The theory and practical necessary to run it.

This is done by a preparation of checksheets of data and a pack matching it
for key posts.

Naturally the org bd now has to become more real and staff has to be
checked out on it.

Then hats as post checksheets and packs are extended to the rest of the staff.
The mechanisms of training have to exist by this time.

Seniors have to be made responsible that every junior below them has a hat
consisting of write-up, checksheet and pack.

Meanwhile one continues to cope.

Gradually, gradually staff begin to know (through checkouts) their hats.
New staff coming on are grooved in better.

Cope begins to diminish and the organization tends to smooth out.
Here and there competent handlings begin to show up brightly.

Now we find a new situation. With everyone throwing together checksheets
and packs for staffs we find nonstandard checksheets. Some messenger has to do
the full checksheet of the HCO Division pages and pages long. The HCO Sec has
a checksheet with just 10 items on it.

So a central authority has to standardize post checksheets and survey and put
in overlooked bits of data.

But that is way up the line. The org long since has become smooth and
prosperous.

So that is the gradient scale of getting in hats.
EXPERTS
Here and there you find an area of special expertise in an org where the

expertise is so expert in itself that it obscures the fact that the person does not
also have a full post hat.

414
A lawyer would be a case in point. It takes so long to learn law in some law
school that an org executive can overlook the fact that the post hat is missing.
Org policy on legal matters and staff hat remain unknown to this legal post AND
JAM IT UTTERLY. This came to light when a whole series of cases was being
neglected because the legal staff member, an excellent lawyer, did not know how
to make out a purchase order or that one could or should. Investigation found no
post or staff hat. Only a legal degree.

Orgs continually do this with auditors. They are technical experts in audit-
ing. So they get assigned to posts in the HGC WITH NO HAT. Backlogs occur,
things goof up. Tech fails. All because it is overlooked that they are PART OF
AN ORG and need staff and post hats and need to be trained on them.

Worse than that, a highly classed auditor is often put on an admin post with-
out hat or training for it.

You would not take an admin-trained person and without further training tell
him to audit. So why take an auditor and tell him to handle an admin division?

Without his post write-up, checksheet and pack FOR THE POST and with-
out training on it, the person just isn’t qualified for it no matter what other line
he is expert in.

It is great to have an expert who has been specially trained in some profession.
But lawyer, engineer or public relations, he must have his hat for the org post and be

trained on it or he will goof! Yet one won’t suspect why that area is goofing because
“he’s a Class VI isn’t he?”

UTILIZATION
Personnel can recruit madly, answering every frantic demand for personnel
and yet HAVE THEM ALL WASTED for lack of full hats and full training on
those hats.

An investigation of blows (desertions) from orgs shows that lack of a
grooved-in hat was at the bottom of it.

People come on a job. It is at once a great mystery or an assumption of total
know—one or the other.

Either one continued leads them into a state of liability to the org.

People who don’t know what they are doing and people who don’t but think
they do are both NONUTILIZED PERSONNEL.

Pay and prosperity for the rest of the staff will go down unless this is remedied.

The whole org can sag and even vanish under these conditions.

So Personnel has a vested interest in hats being complete and staff trained on
them. For Personnel people cannot possibly cope with “no pay so can’t hire

anyone” and “no people so can’t produce.”

The answer is H-A-T-S.

415
And a hat is a write-up, a checksheet and a pack.

And the staff member trained on them.

ETHICS
When a person has no hat he lacks purpose and value.
When he has no purpose and value he not only goofs, he will commit crimes.

It is apparently easier to hit with ethics than to program and give someone a
full hat and get him trained on it.

Police action is not a substitute for having purpose and value.

This is so fundamental that one can even trace the unrest of a nation to lack
of purpose and value. A huge welfare program guarantees crime and revolt be-
cause it gives handouts, not hats.

Even a field Scientologist should have a hat.

By doing only this over the world we would own the planet, as in an expand-
ing population, individual purpose and value are the most vital and wanted com-
modities.

If there are no real hats there will soon be no money of any value and no
bread!

SUMMARY

ANY HAT IS BETTER THAN NO HAT according to the way a thetan
seems to think.

But be that as it may, the downfall of any org can be traced directly and
instantly to no recruiting or no org board, no hats or unreal hats or no training
on hats.

The sag of an org can be traced directly to lack of hats and lack of training
on hats.

The overload of any post can be traced directly to lack of an org bd and lack
of hats and no training on hats.

The way out is to organize the org board and hats while you cope.

If you do not, your cope will become an overwhelm. If you do, your burden
will lighten and your prosperity increase.

It took 13 months of hard work and 20 years of org experience to learn that,
given a product, lack of HATS was the WHY of departures from the ideal scene
and that working toward providing full complete HATS was the way to get back
toward the ideal scene.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

416
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 6 OCTOBER 1970
Remimeo Issue II

Personnel Series 10

“MOONLIGHTING”

Staff members of an org who also have other jobs outside the org are said to
be MOONLIGHTING.

Day staff with an evening or weekend job or Foundation staff with a day job
have been accused unjustly in the past of injuring an org.

An org only gets injured when its doors get closed and it ceases to promote
and deliver good service.

If a whole staff of a Day org decided to close the org all day and open it
only in the evening, “moonlighting” would have destroyed the Day org. This
would be heavily frowned upon.

If a Foundation staff closed the Foundation to get evening work, it would be
a highly nonsurvival act and injurious.

An org which is just starting up or which has been so un-org boarded and
unhatted that it fell into such a slump that staff could not live on its pay, the staff
would be remiss not to moonlight while they built the org back up. Built up, org
boarded and hatted, the org could pay its staff adequately.

To forbid the practice of moonlighting would be to force a staff member to
blow in self-defense.

INFLATION

As money inflates (purchases less) and as the cost of operating rises and fees
remain unchanged, an org can get into a situation where it is inefficient and pays
low salaries.

“Moonlighting on the government” would be quite permissible. With gov-
ernments anxious to hand out welfare, in some depressed area it would be quite
all right to go on the dole or relief and work as a church volunteer in the org.

The higher unemployment rises, the less money will buy, the more finance
trouble there is.

Org staffs under such duress can even live as monasteries for food, shelter
and pocket money and keep an org going.

SUBSIDY

At this writing the only subsidies available from governments are for those

417
who kill people. The money the government should be spending to support our
orgs goes to special interest groups like psychiatry who pocket it and deliver nothing.

Up the years this may change.
Until it does we have to keep our heads up financially.

That also applies to an org staff member. There is no reason he should lose
his staff job because he also has to moonlight to live.

A well-run, well-recruited, well-org boarded, well-hatted, well-trained org
delivering high quality training and auditing makes very adequate income and
pays well. But it sometimes takes time to build up from a mismanaged slump to
an ideal scene again.

There is no policy against MOONLIGHTING where it does not injure the org.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

418
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 9 OCTOBER 1970

Remimeo
Personnel Hats
PR Checksheets

Personnel Series 11
PR Series 4

THE PR PERSONALITY

A public relations personnel has to be spot on in:

a. Confronting

b. Organizing

c. Working.

CONFRONT

In confronting, a shy or retiring PR is not about to handle suppressive per-
sons or situations. A PR must be able to stand up to and handle the more wild
situations easily and with composure. When he does not, his confront blows and
any sense of presentation or organization would go up in smoke. A PTS (poten-
tial trouble source) person or one who roller-coasters casewise or one who tends

to retreat has no business in PR. His connections that make him PTS and his case
would have to be handled fully before he could make good on PR lines.

ORGANIZE

In organizing, a PR has to be able not only to organize something well but to
organize it faultlessly in a flash.

Every action a PR takes concerns groups and therefore has to be organized
down to the finest detail; otherwise it will just be a mob scene and a very bad
presentation.

A PR who can confront, can “think on his feet” and grasp and handle sit-
uations rapidly and who can organize in a flash will succeed as a PR.

WORK
The last essential ingredient of a PR is the ability to WORK.

When appointing people to PR training, the person’s work record is very,
very important.

The ability to address letters, push around files, haul furniture into place,
handle towering stacks of admin in nothing flat are all PR requisites.

419
To be able to tear out to Poughkeepsie before lunch and set up the baby
contest and build a scene for a press conference on catfish before two and get
dressed, meet the governor by six is WORK. It takes sweat and push and energy.

A PR should be able to get out a trade paper in hours where an “editor”
might take weeks.

The ability to work must be established in a potential PR before wasting any
training time, as a PR who can’t work fails every time.

DELUSORY REQUIREMENTS
People think a PR must be charming, brilliant, able to inspire, etc., etc.
These are fine if they exist. But they are actually secondary qualities in a PR.

Lack of the (a), (b), (c) qualities is why you see PRs begin to hit the bottle,
get sick, fail.

If a PR is also charming, brilliant, able to inspire, he is a real winner. Pos-
sibly one is born with all these qualities every few generations.

Personnel in appointing and training PR must look for the wish to be a PR
and (a), (b) and (c).

And anyone taking up PR who does so to escape hard work will fail as it IS
hard work.

A real top PR wants to be one, has the abilities of (a), (b) and (c) and is

trained hard and well in the subject. Then you have a real stat raiser, a real
winner, a real empire builder.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

420
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 20 NOVEMBER 1970
Remimeo
(Also issued as an HCOB,
same date and title)

Personnel Series 12
Org Series 15
Word Clearing Series 18

ORGANIZATION MISUNDERSTOODS

By Scientology study technology, understanding ceases on going past a mis-
understood word or concept.

If a person reading a text comes to the words “Felis domesticus” and doesn’t
know it simply means HOUSE CAT, the words which appear thereafter may
become “meaningless,” “uninteresting” and he may even become slightly uncon-
scious, his awareness shutting down.

Example: “Wind the clock and put out the Felis domesticus and then call
Algernon and tell him to wake you at 10:00 A.m.,” read as an order by a person
who didn’t bother to find out that “Felis domesticus” means “house cat” or “the
variety of cat which has been domesticated”’ will not register that he is supposed
to call Algernon, will feel dopey or annoyed and probably won’t remember he’s
supposed to wake up at 10:00 a.m.

In other words, when the person hit a misunderstood word, he ceased to under-
stand and did not fully grasp or become aware of what followed after.

All this applies to a sentence, a book, a post or a whole organization.

Along the time track a crashing misunderstood will block off further ability
to study or apply data. It will also block further understanding of an organiza-
tion, its org board, an individual post or duties, and such misunderstoods can
effectively prevent knowledge of or action on a post.

ALL THIS IS THE MOST COMMON CAUSE OF AN UNACCEPTABLE
POST PRODUCT, OR NO PRODUCT AT ALL.

The difficulties of an organization in functioning or producing stem from
this fact.

Personal aberration is the cause of products that are in fact overt acts.
Scientology technology today easily handles the personal aberration part of
the problem, IF IT IS USED AND PROPERLY APPLIED. Leaving an org un-

audited or being unable to figure out how to run a viable org so that it can afford
to audit its staff members is asking for post or org products that are overt acts.

421
Employing persons of the Leipzig, Germany, death-camp school (psycholo-
gists, psychiatrists) to handle personal aberration is like throwing ink in water to
clean it up. Governments stupidly do this and wonder why their final product as
an organization is riot, war and a polluted planet. The point is not how bad
psychology and psychiatry are, but that one does have to handle personal aber-
ration in an organization, and these schools were too vicious and incompetent to
do so.

Those who are personally very aberrated are not about to produce anything
but an overt act. They are difficult to detect as they are being careful not to be
detected. Things “just sort of go wrong” around them, resulting in a product that
is in fact an overt act. But these constitute only about ten or twenty percent of the
population.

The remaining eighty percent or ninety percent where they are nonfunctional
or bungling are so because they do not understand what it’s all about. They have
in effect gone on by a misunderstood such as what the org is supposed to do or
the admin tech they use on their posts or where they are or what their product is.

Earth organizations like governments or big monopolies get a very bad re-
pute because of these factors:

1. Personal aberration of a few undetected and unhandled.

2. Inadequate or unreal basic education technology and facilities.
3. Inadequate or unknown organization technology.
4

Noncomprehension of the individual regarding the activities of which he
is a part.

Noncomprehension of the basic words with which he is working.
Purposes of the post uncleared.
Admin of the post not known or comprehended.

Technology in use not fully understood.

oO ern BM

A lack of comprehension of products.

Out of these nine things one gets organizational troubles and the belief that it
takes a genius to run one successfully. Yet all the genius in the world will fail
eventually if the above nine things are not handled to some degree.

The common methods currently in use on the planet to handle these things
are very crude and time-consuming, as the items themselves are either dimly
comprehended or not known at all.

1A. Personal aberration is met by torture, drugs or death when it is detected.
Yet only the very serious cases who are obviously screaming, muttering
or unconscious are singled out, whereas the dangerous ones are neither
detected nor handled at all and become with ease generals or presidents
or dictators, to say nothing of lesser fry. Ten percent to twenty percent of
any organization is stark, staring mad, doing the place in so adroitly
that only their actual product betrays them.

422
2A.

3A.

4A.

SA.

6A.

TA.

8A.

9A.

Basic education as well as higher general education has become a mass-
produced area crawling with bad texts and noncomprehension and used
mainly by hostile elements to overturn the state or pervert the race and
its ideals.

Organizational technology is so primitive as to change national maps
and leading companies many times a century, an extremely unstable
scene for a planet.

Very few individuals on the planet have any concept of the structure of
entities such as their country or state or company. Persons surveying the
public in the US, pretending to advise acceptance of ‘new measures”
already in the Constitution, were threatened for being revolutionaries.
Hardly anyone knew the basic document of the nation’s organization
much less its rambling structure.

The basic words of organization are glibly used but not generally compre-
hended—words like “company,” “management,” “policy.” Vocabularies
have to be increased before comprehension and communication occur and
misunderstoods drop out.

Post purposes are often glibly agreed with while something entirely dif-
ferent is done.

Administrative actions involving posts are often only dimly compre-
hended and seldom well followed; but in this matter of communication,
despatches, etc., the planet is not as deficient as in others except that
these functions, being somewhat known, can become an end-all—tons of
despatches, no actual product. In some areas it is an obsession, an end-
less paper chain, that is looked on as a legitimate product even when it
leads to no production.

The planet’s technology is on the surface very complex and sophisti-
cated but is so bad in actual fact that experts do not give the planet and
its populations thirty years before the smoke and fumes will have eaten
up the air cover and left an oxygenless world. (The converters like trees
and grass which change carbon dioxide to oxygen are inadequate to
replace the oxygen and are additionally being killed by air impurities
coming out of factories and cities.) If the technology destroys the base
where it is done—in this case the planet—it is not adequate and may
even be destructive technology.

The whole idea of “product” is not in use except in commercial industry

where one has to have a car that sells or a washing machine that actually
washes.

THE HARD ROAD

It is against this primitive background that one is trying to run an organization.

If it were not for improvements made on each one of these points, the task
could be hopeless.

423
I have gone to some length to outline the lacks in order to show the points
where one must concentrate in (a) putting an org together and (b) keeping it
viable.

In these nine areas we are dealing with the heart of it in running orgs.

Enthusiasm is a vital ingredient. It soon goes dull when insufficient attention
is paid to resolving and getting in these nine points.

Bluntly, if they are not gotten in and handled, the task of living and running
a post or an org will become so confused that little or no production will occur
and disasters will be frequent.

THE WORDS

The by-no-means-complete list of words that have to be fully cleared and
understood just to talk about organization as a subject, and to intelligently and
happily work in an org EVEN AS ITS LOWEST EMPLOYEE is:

A company

A board of directors
Top management
Policy
Management
Programs
Targets

Orders
Technology
Know-how

Org bd

Post

Hat

Cope

Purposes
Organize

Duties

A checksheet

A checklist

A comm channel
A command channel
A relay point

A stable terminal
Double-hatted

A product
Aberration
VIABILITY

This is key vocabulary. One could draw up a whole dictionary for these
things and no one studying it would be any wiser since it would become salted
with other words of far less importance.

The way to do this list is sweat it out with a meter until one knows each can’t
mean anything else than what it does mean.

424
Out of a full understanding of what is implied by each, a brilliantly clean
view is attained of the whole subject of organization, not as a fumble but as a
crisp usable activity.

Unless one at least knows these words completely so that they can be used
and applied, they will not buffer off confusions that enter into the activity.

Glibness won’t do. For behind these words is the full structure of an activity
that will survive and when the words aren’t understood the rest can become
foggy.

We do know all these needful things. We must communicate them and use
them successfully.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

425
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 6 DECEMBER 1970
Remimeo
Dept 14 Hats

Personnel Series 13
Org Series 18

THIRD DYNAMIC DE-ABERRATION

The exact mechanism of 3rd dynamic (group or organization) aberration is
the conflict of COUNTER-POLICY.

Illegal policy set at unauthorized levels jams the actions of a group and IS
responsible for the inactivity, nonproduction or lack of team spirit.

Counter-policy independently set jams the group together but inhibits its
operation.

Out-reality on org bds, hats, etc., is to a large degree caused by disagree-
ments and conflicts which are caused by illegal policy.

If we had a game going in which each player set his own rules, there would
be no game. There would only be argument and conflict.

VARIETIES OF COUNTER-POLICY

At the start it must be assumed or effected that there is someone or some-
body to set authorized policy for the group. Absence of this function is an invi-
tation to random policy and group conflict and disintegration. If such a person or
body exists, new proposed policy must be referred to this person or body and
issued, not set randomly at lower levels or by unauthorized persons.

Policies so set by the policy authority must be informed enough and wise
enough to forward the group purpose and to obtain agreement. Ignorant or bad
policy even when authorized tends to persuade group members to set their own
random policy.

When no policy at all exists random policy occurs.

When policy exists but is not made known, random policy setting will occur.

Ignorance of policy, the need or function of it, can cause random policies.

Hidden not stated random policies can conflict.

Correct policy can be relayed on a cutative basis—a few words left off or a

qualifying sentence dropped which makes policy incorrect or null. “Children
may not go out” can be made out of “Children may not go out after midnight.”

426
Altered policy can be limitless in error.

Attributing a self-set policy to the authorized source can disgrace all policy
as well as pervert the leadership purpose.

Policy can be excluded from a zone of a group that should be governed by it.
‘“Pipe-making policy does not apply to the small pipe shop.”

Such masses of unnecessary policy can be issued that it cannot be assimi-
lated.

Policy can exist in large amounts but not be subdivided into relevant subjects
as is done in hat checksheets.

Disgrace of policy can occur in a subsequent catastrophe and render any
policy disgraceful, encouraging self-set policy by each group member.

CLEARING A GROUP
All authorized policy must be set or made available in master books and
adequate complete policy files. This makes it possible to compile hats and check-
sheets and issue packs.

Group surveys of “What policy are you operating on?” can reveal random
policy.

All bugged (halted) projects can be surveyed for illegal policy and cleaned
up and gotten going again.

Other actions can be taken all of which add up to:
1. Get existing policy used.

2. Get areas without policy crisply given policy from the authorized
source.

3. Debug all past projects of false policy.

4. De-aberrate group members as per the Organization Misunderstoods PL
and other materials.

5. Educate the group members concerning policy technology.

6. Set up systems that detect, isolate and report out-policy and get it cor-
rected and properly set, issued and known.

7. Monitor any new policy against statistics and include policy outnesses as
part of all statistical evaluations.

ADMIN SCALE

I have developed a scale for use which gives a sequence (and relative senior-
ity) of subjects relating to organization.

427
GOALS

PURPOSES

POLICY

PLANS

PROGRAMS

PROJECTS

ORDERS

IDEAL SCENES

STATS

VALUABLE FINAL PRODUCTS

This scale is worked up and worked down UNTIL IT IS (EACH ITEM) IN
FULL AGREEMENT WITH THE REMAINING ITEMS.

In short, for success, all these items in the scale must agree with all other
items in the scale on the same subject.

Let us take “golf balls” as a subject for the scale. Then all these scale items
must be in agreement with one another on the subject of golf balls. It is an
interesting exercise.

The scale also applies in a destructive subject. Like “cockroaches.”

When an item in the scale is not aligned with the other items, the project
will be hindered if not fail.

The skill with which all these items in any activity are aligned and gotten
into action is called MANAGEMENT.

Group members only become upset when one or more of these points are not
aligned to the rest and at least some group agreement.

Groups appear slow, inefficient, unhappy, inactive or quarrelsome only when
these items are not aligned, made known and coordinated.

Any activity can be improved by debugging or aligning this scale in relation
to the group activity.

As out-reality breeds out-comm and out-affinity, it follows that unreal items
on the scale (not aligned) produce ARC breaks, upsets and disaffection.

It then follows that when these scale items are well aligned with each other
and the group there will be high reality, high communication and high affinity in
the group.

Group mores aligned so and followed by the group gives one an ethical
group and also establishes what will then be considered as overts and withholds
in the group by group members.

This scale and its parts and ability to line them up are one of the most
valuable tools of organization.

428
DEBUG

When orders are not complied with and projects do not come off, one should
DETECT, ISOLATE and REPORT and handle or see that it is handled, any of
the scale items found random or counter.

If any item below POLICY is in trouble—not moving—one can move up-
wards correcting these points, but certainly concentrating on a discovery of ille-
gal or counter-policy. Rarely it occurs some old but legal policy needs to be
adjusted. Far more commonly policy is being set by someone, verbally or in
despatches, or hidden, that is bugging any item or items below the level of policy.

So the rule is that when things get messed up, jammed up, slowed or inactive
or downright destructive (including a product as an overt act) one sniffs about for
random or counter-policy illegally being set in one’s own area or “out there.”

Thus in the face of any outness one DETECTS—ISOLATES—REPORTS
and handles or gets handled the out-policy.

The detection is easy. Things aren’t moving or going right.

The isolation is of course a WHAT POLICY that must be found and WHO
set it.

Reporting it would mean to HCO.
Handling it is also very easy and would be done in Qual.

This admin tech gives us our first 3rd dynamic de-aberrater that works easily
and fast.

Why?
Well, look at the Admin Scale. Policy is just below purpose.
Purpose is senior to policy.

The person who is setting random or counter illegal policy is off group pur-
pose. He is other-purposed to greater or lesser degree.

From 1960 to 1962 I developed a vast lot of technology about goals and
purposes. If we define a goal as a whole track long, long-term matter and a
purpose as the lesser goal applying to specific activities or subjects we see
clearly that if we clean up a person’s purposes relating to the various activities in
which he is involved and on the eight dynamics we will handle the obsession to
set random or counter-policies!

So it is an auditing job and the tech for it is extensive. (The African ACC
was devoted to this subject. Lots of data exists on it.)

It happens however that around 20 percent (probably more) of any group’s
members are actively if covertly antigroup and must be handled at a less pro-
found level under “personal aberration” in the Org Misunderstoods policy letter
before you can begin to touch purpose.

429
Thus any group member, since this tech remedy helps them all, would be
handled with:

1. General case de-aberration (called L10s on Flag).
2. Purpose handling for posts.
3. Org bd, hatting and training.

Those setting random or counter-purpose later detected would get further no.
2 and no. 3.

As the universe is full of beings and one lives with them whether he likes it
or not, it would be to anyone’s interest to be able to have functioning groups.

The only way a group jams up and (a) becomes difficult to live in, and (b)
impossible to fully separate from, is by random and counter-purposes.

If one thinks he can go off and be alone anywhere in this universe he is
dreaming.

The first impulse of a hostile being is “to leave” adecent group. What a weird one.
The only reason he gets in jams is his inability to tolerate or handle others.
There’s no road out for such a being except through.

Thus all we can do to survive even on the first dynamic is to know how to
handle and be part of the third or fourth dynamic and clean it up.

Probably the reason this universe itself is considered by some as a trap is
because their Admin Scale is out regarding it.

And the only reason this universe is sometimes a trial is because no one
published its Admin Scale in the first place.

All this is very fundamental first dynamic tech and third dynamic tech.

It is the first true group technology that can fully de-aberrate and smooth out
and free within the group every group member and the group itself.

Thus, combined with auditing tech, for the first time we can rely wholly on
technology to improve and handle group members and the group itself toward
desirable and achievable accomplishment with happiness and high morale.

Like any skill or technology it has to be known and done and continued in
use to be effective.

The discovery, development and practical use of this data has made me very,
very cheerful and confident and is doing the same thing on the test group.

I hope it does the same for you.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

430
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 DECEMBER 1970

Remimeo

Personnel Series 14
Org Series 19

GROUP SANITY

The points of success and failure, the make and break items of an organization are:
1. HIRING
2. TRAINING
3. APPRENTICESHIPS
4. UTILIZATION
5. PRODUCTION
. PROMOTION
. SALES

ao nN AN

. DELIVERY

\O

. FINANCE
10. JUSTICE
11. MORALE

These eleven items MUST AGREE WITH AND BE IN LINE WITH THE
ADMIN SCALE (Org Series 18 THIRD DYNAMIC DE-ABERRATION).

Where these subjects are not well handled and where one or more of these
are very out of line, the organization will suffer a third dynamic aberration.

This then is a SANITY SCALE for the third dynamic of a group.

The group will exhibit aberrated symptoms where one or more of these
points are out.

The group will be sane to the degree that these points are in.
Internal stresses of magnitude begin to affect every member of the group in

greater or lesser degree when one or more of these items are neglected or badly
handled.

431
The society at large currently has the majority of these points out.

These elements become aberrated in the following ways:

1. HIRING

The society is running a massive can’t-have on the subject of people. Auto-
mation and employment penalties demonstrate an effort to block out letting people
in and giving them jobs. Confirming this is growing unemployment and fantastic
sums for welfare—meaning relief. Fifty percent of America within the decade
will be jobless due to the population explosion without a commensurate expan-
sion in production. Yet production by US presidential decree is being cut back.
War, birth control, are two of many methods used to reduce population. THIS
THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A REFUSAL TO EMPLOY PEOPLE. EX-
CLUSION OF OTHERS IS THE BASIC CAUSE OF WAR AND INSANITY.

2. TRAINING

Education has fallen under the control of one-worlders, is less and less real.
Data taught is being taught less well. Less data is being taught. School and col-
lege unrest reflect this. Confirmation is the deteriorated basic education found in
teenagers such as writing. Older technologies are being lost in modern rewrites.
THIS THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A COVERT REFUSAL TO TRAIN.

3. APPRENTICESHIPS

The most successful industries, activities and professions of earlier centuries
were attained by training the person as an apprentice, permitting him to under-
study the exact job he would hold for a long period before taking the post. Some
European schools are seeking to revive this but on a general basis, not as an
apprentice system. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A DENIAL OF ADE-
QUATE EXPERIENCE TO SUCCEED.

4, UTILIZATION

In industries, governments and armed services as well as life itself, person-
nel are not utilized. A man trained for one thing is required to do something else.
Or his training is not used. Or he is not used at all. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSY-
CHOSIS IS FAILURE TO UTILIZE PEOPLE.

5. PRODUCTION

Modern think is to reward downstats. A person is paid for not working. Govern-
ments who produce nothing employ the most people. Income tax and other current
practices penalize production. Countries which produce little are given huge hand-
outs. War which destroys attains the largest appropriations. A THIRD DYNAMIC
PSYCHOSIS IS TO PREVENT PRODUCTION.

6. PROMOTION

Promotion activities are subverted to unworthy activities. True value is sel-
dom promoted. What one is actually achieving gets small mention while other
things are heavily promoted. Reality and PR are strangers. A THIRD DY-
NAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS UNREAL OR NONFACTUAL PROMOTION.

432
7. SALES

Sales actions are unreal or out of balance. Clumsy or nonfunctioning sales
activities penalize producers and consumers. In areas of high demand, sales ac-
tions are negligible even when heavy advertising exists. This is proven by the
inability to sell what is produced even in large countries so that production cut-
backs are continual threats to economies and workers. A population goes half-fed
in times of surplus goods. With curtailed car factories a nation drives old cars.
With a cut-back construction industry people live in bad houses. Sales taxes are
almost universal. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS THE IMPEDING OF
PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION TO POTENTIAL CONSUMERS.

8. DELIVERY

Failure to deliver what is offered is standard procedure for groups in the
humanities. Commercially it is well in hand.

9, FINANCE

One’s own experience in finance is adequate to demonstrate the difficulties
made with money. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS THE PERVERSION
OF FINANCE.

10. JUSTICE

Under the name of justice, aberrated man accomplishes fantastic injustices.
The upstat is hit, the downstat let go. Rumors are accepted as evidence. Police
forces and power are used to ENFORCE the injustices contained in 1 to 9 above.
Suppressive justice is used as an ineffectual but savage means of meeting situa-
tions actually caused by the earlier listed psychoses. When abuses on (1) to (9)
make things go wrong, the social aberration then introduces suppressive injus-
tices as an effort to cure. Revolt and war are magnified versions of injustices.
Excess people—kill them off in a war. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS
THE SUBSTITUTE OF VIOLENCE FOR REASON.

11. MORALE

A continuous assault on public morale occurs in the press and other media.
Happiness or any satisfaction with life is under continuous attack. Beliefs, ideal-
ism, purpose, dreams, are assaulted. INSANITY IS A REFUSAL TO ALLOW
OTHERS TO BE, DO OR HAVE.

Any action which would lead to a higher morale has to be defended against

the insane few. A THIRD DYNAMIC PSYCHOSIS IS A DETESTATION OF
HIGH MORALE.

The COMMON DENOMINATOR of all these insanities is the desire to SUC-
CUMB.

Insanities have as their end product self or group destruction.

433
These eleven types of aberration gone mad are the main points through
which any group SUCCUMBS.

THEREFORE, these eleven points kept sane guarantee a group’s SUR-
VIVAL.

EXAMPLES

Seeing all this in one example permits one to see that these third dynamic
insanities combine to destroy.

A. Believing it impossible to obtain money or make it, a firm cannot hire
enough people to produce. So has little to sell, which is badly promoted
and is not sold so it has no money to hire people.

B. Needing people for another job the firm robs them from a plant which
then collapses and fails to make money so no new people can be hired.
This reduces production so people have to be dismissed as they can’t be
paid.

C. Persons are in the firm but are kept doing the wrong things so there is
little production and no promotion or sales so there is no money to pay
them so they are dismissed.

D. A new product is put in. People to make it are taken from the area
already making a valuable product which then collapses that area and
there is not enough money to promote and selling fails so people are
dismissed.

The examples are many. They are these same eleven group insanities in play
upon a group, a firm, a society.

SANITY

If this is a description of group aberration, then it gives the keys to sanity in
a group.

1. HIRING

Letting people INTO the group at large is the key to every great movement
and bettered culture on this planet. This was the new idea that made Buddhism
the strongest civilizing influence the world has seen in terms of numbers and
terrain. They did not exclude. Race, color, creed, were not made bars to mem-
bership in this great movement.

Politically the strongest country in the world was the United States, and it
was weakened only by its efforts to exclude certain races or make them second-
class citizens. Its greatest internal war (1861-65) was fought to settle this point,
and the weakness was not resolved even then.

The Catholic Church only began to fail when it began to exclude.

Thus inclusion is a major point in all great organizations.

434
The things which set a group or organization on a course of exclusion are (a)
the destructive impulses of about 10 or 15 percent of the society (lunacy) and (b)
opposition by interests which consider themselves threatened by the group or or-
ganization’s potential resulting in infiltration, (c) efforts to mimic the group’s
technology destructively and set up rival groups.

All these three things build up barriers that a group might thoughtlessly buy
and act to remedy with no long-range plans to handle.

These stresses make a group edgy and combative. The organization then
seeks to solve these three points by exclusion, whereas its growth depends wholly
upon inclusion.

No one has ever solved these points successfully in the past because of lack
of technology to solve them.

It all hinges on three points: (1) the sanity of the individual, (2) the worth-
whileness of the group in terms of general area, planetary or universal survival,
and (3) the superiority of the group’s organization tech and its use.

Just at this writing, the first point is solved conclusively in Scientology. Even
hostile and destructive personalities wandering into the group can be solved and,
due to the basic nature of man, made better for the benefit of themselves and others.

The worthwhileness of the organization is determined by the assistance given
to general survival by the group’s products and the actual factual delivery of
those valid products.

The superiority of a group’s admin tech and its application is at this current
writing well covered in current developments.

Thus inclusion is almost fully attainable. The only ridges that build up are
the short-term defense actions.

For instance, Scientology currently must fight back at the death camp organi-
zations of psychiatry whose solution is a dead world, as proven by their actions in
Germany before and during World War II. But we must keep in mind that we
fully intend to reform and salvage even these opponents. We are seeking to in-
clude them in the general survival by forcing them to cease their nonsurvival
practices and overcome their gruesome group past.

There are two major stages then of including people—one is as paid organi-
zation personnel and one as unpaid personnel. BOTH are in essence being
“hired.” The pay differs. The wider majority receive the pay of personal peace
and effectiveness and a better world.

The org which excludes its own field members will fail.
The payment to the org of money or the money payment to the staff member
is an internal economy. Pay, the real pay, is a better personal survival and a

world that can live.

Plans of INclusion are successful. They sometimes contain defense until we
can include.

435
Even resistance to an org can be interpreted as a future inclusion by the org.
Resistance or opposition is a common way point in the cycle of inclusion. In an
organization where everyone wins eventually anyway the senselessness of resist-
ance becomes apparent even to the most obtuse. Only those who oppose their
own survival resist a survival-producing organization.

Even in commercial companies the best organization with the best product
usually finds competitors merging with it.

2. TRAINING

Basic training, hats, checksheets and packs MUST exist for every member of
a group.

Criminal or antisocial conduct occurs where there is no hat.

Any type of membership or role or post in the whole organization or its field
requires individual and team training. Only where you have a group member who
will not or cannot bring himself to have and wear a hat will you have any trouble.

This is so true that it is the scope of Personal Enhancement.

Ask yourself, ‘“‘Who isn’t trained on his post and hatted?” and you can an-
swer, ““Who is causing the trouble?”

Basic training, slight or great, is vital for every member of a group, paid or
unpaid.

A field auditor must have a hat. A student needs a student hat, etc., etc.

This requires training.

Training begins in childhood. Often it has to be reoriented.

Training as a group member must be done.

Training in exact technology or in the precise tech of admin is not the first
stage of training. Basic training of group members, no matter how slight, must

exist and be done.

Otherwise group members lack the basic points of agreement which make up
the whole broad organization and its publics.

Training must be on real materials and must be rapid. The technology of
how to train is expressed in speed of training.

The idea that it takes 12 years to make a mud pie maker is false. TIME in
training does not determine quality of training. Amount of data learned that can
be applied and skills successfully drilled determine training.

That the society currently stresses time is an aberrated factor.

The ability to learn and apply the data is the end product of training. Not
old age.

436
The rate of training establishes to a marked degree the expansion factor of a
group and influences the smoothness of the group during expansion.

If training is defined as making a person or team into a part of the group
then processing is an influencing factor. The facilities for processing and quan-
tity available are then a determining factor in group expansion.

3. APPRENTICESHIP
Training on post is a second stage of any training—and processing—action.
This is essentially a familiarization action.

To have a person leave a post and another take it over with no ‘‘apprentice-
ship” or groove-in can be quite fatal.

The deputy system is easily the best system. Every post is deputied for a
greater or lesser period before the post is turned over and the appointment is
made. When the deputy is totally familiar he becomes the person on the post.

Rapid expansion and economy on personnel tend to injure this step. Lack of
it can be very destructive.

Optimally there should be one or two deputies for every key post at all times.
This is a continual apprenticeship system.

Economically it has limitations. One has to weigh the losses in not doing it
against the cost in doing it. It will be found that the losses are far greater than
the cost, even though it increases personnel by at least a third for a given organi-
zation.

When an organization has neglected it as a system (and has turned over too
many posts without deputy or apprenticeship action) its economics may decay to
where it can never be done. This is almost a death rattle for an organization.

In a two-century-old, highly successful industry, only the apprentice system was
and is used (Oporto wine industry). The quality of the product is all that keeps
the product going on the world market. If the quality decayed the industry would
collapse. Apprenticeship as a total system maintains it.

Certainly every executive in an organization and every technical expert should
have a deputy in training. Only then could quality of organization be maintained
and quality of product guaranteed.

The total working organization should be on this system actually. And when-
ever a person is moved up off a post, the deputy taking over, a new deputy
should be appointed. The last step (appointment of a new deputy) is the one that
gets forgotten.

Failure to recruit new people over a period will very surely find the whole
organization declining soon solely because there is no apprentice system of depu-
ties. The organization expands, singles up the posts, promotes some unappren-
ticed people and begins to lose its economic advantage. Low pay ensues, people
blow off, and then no one can be hired. It’s a silly cycle, really, as it is prevented
easily enough by hiring enough soon enough when the org is still doing well.

437
The rule is DEPUTY EVERY POST AND NEWLY DEPUTY THEM
WHEN PROMOTIONS OCCUR.

The most covert way to get around this is just to call each person’s junior a
deputy even though he has other duties. This makes it all look good on an org
board. ““Do you have each post deputied?” “Oh yes!” But the deputies are just
juniors with posts of their own.

A deputy is used to run the same post as it is deputied for. This means a
double posting pure and only.

You’d be amazed at how much production an executive post can achieve

when it is also deputied and when the principal holder of the post will use the
deputy and gen him in, not get him to cover an empty lower post.

4. UTILIZATION
People must be utilized.
Equipment must be utilized.
Space must be utilized.

Learning to USE is a very hard lesson for some. Untrained people, bad
organization, poor machinery, inadequate space all tend to send one off utilization.

The rule is, if you’ve got it use it; if you can’t use it get rid of it.
This most specifically applies to people. If you’ve got a man, use him; if you
can’t use him get him over to someone who can use him. If he isn’t useful,

process and train.

Anyone who can’t figure out how to use people, equipment and spaces to
obtain valuable final products is not worthy of the name of executive.

Reversely we get what an executive or foreman is—an executive or foreman
is one who can obtain, train and use people, equipment and spaces to economi-
cally achieve valuable final products.

Some are very skilled in preparing people, systems, equipment, property
and spaces to be used. But if these then go to someone who does not USE them
you get a bad breakdown.

The welfare state and its inflation is a sad commentary on “executive ability.”

An executive whose people are idle and whose materiel is decaying is a
traitor to his people and the org, just that, for he will destroy them all.

UTILIZATION requires a knowledge of what the valuable final products are
and how to make them.

Action which doesn’t result in a final product that adds up to valuable final
products is destructive, no matter how innocent it seems.

438
Man has a planet as a valuable final product. Improper use of the countries
and seas, air and masses which compose it will wind up with the destruction of
man, all life on it and the usefulness of the planet. So proper utilization of any-
thing is a very real factor.

The 19th century industrialist, like the mad kings who built great structures,
used up men; they didn’t properly use men.

And not using them at all, the current fad, is the most deadly of all.

UTILIZATION is a big subject. It applies to resources, capabilities and many
other factors.

The question being asked in all cases is, “How can we USE this to economi-
cally obtain a valuable final product?”

Failing to answer that question gives one the “mysteries of life.”

5. PRODUCTION
One may be prone to believe there is no sense in any production at all. Such
a one would also be likely to say, “There is no sense at all.’ Or, “If they keep on
producing it will become impossible to destroy it all.”

Production of some final valuable product is the chain of all production se-
quences.

Even the artist is producing a reaction. The reaction’s service in a wider
sphere to enforce it is what gives art its sense. A feeling of well-being or gran-
deur or light-heartedness are legitimate valuable final products, for instance.

The production areas and activities of an org that produce the valuable final
products are the most important areas and activities of the org.

6. PROMOTION

The acceptance of valuable final products and of their value depends in a
large degree upon (a) a real value and (b) a desire for them.

Promotion creates desire for the valuable final product.

The old saw that the man who builds a better mousetrap will have the whole
world coming to his door is a total falsity.

Unless the value is made known, and the desire created, the mousetraps are
going to go unsold.

Promotion is so important that it can stand alone. It can have limited success
even when there is no product! But in that case it will be of short duration.

Promotion must contain reality and the final product must exist and be de-
liverable and delivered for promotion to be fully successful.

Public relations and advertising and all their skills cover this area of promotion.

439
7. SALES
It is hard to sell what isn’t promoted and can’t be delivered.
Economics greatly affect selling.

Anything must be sold for a price comparable to its value in the eyes of the
purchaser.

COSTING is a precise art by which the total expenses of the organization
administration and production must be adequately covered in the PRICING al-
lowing for all losses and errors in delivery and adequate to produce a reserve.

PRICING (the amount being asked) cannot be done without some idea of the
total cost of the final valuable product.

The sale price of one final valuable product may have to cover the cost of
producing other products which are delivered without price.

PRICING however does not necessarily limit itself to only covering immedi-
ate cost of a product. A painting with a dollar’s worth of paint and canvas may
have a price of half a million dollars.

Also a painting used in promotion may cost two hundred dollars and be dis-
played at no cost at all to the beholder.

These relative factors also include the SKILL of the salesman himself and
there is much technology involved in the act of selling something to someone and
the world abounds in books on the subject.

Therefore sales (once promotion is done) are bound up really in COSTING,
PRICING AND SELLING.

The value in the eye of the purchaser is monitored by the desire created in
him for it. If this is also a real value and if delivery can occur then SELLING is
made very easy—but it is still a skilled action.

The production of a valuable final product is often totally determined by
whether or not it can be sold. And if it can be sold at a price greater than the
cost of delivering it.

That it gets sold depends on the salesman.

The skill of the salesman is devoted to enhancing the desire and value in the
eyes of the buyer and obtaining adequate payment.

8. DELIVERY

The subject and action of DELIVERY is the most susceptible to breakdown
in any organization. Any flaw on the sequence of actions resulting in a valuable
final product may deteriorate it or bar off final delivery.

There are many preparatory or hidden-from-public-view steps on a produc-
tion line. When any of these break down, delivery is imperiled.

Given the raw materials and wherewithal to make some valuable final prod-
uct, the valuable final product should occur.

440
WHEN A VALUABLE FINAL PRODUCT DOES NOT GET PRODUCED
AND CANNOT BE DELIVERED, REPAIR THE EARLIER STEPS OF ITS PRO-
DUCTION.

Example: An auditing result is not delivered. Don’t just repair the pc. Repair
training of auditors and C/Ses. Repair the assembly line before the valuable final
product. The subproducts are less visible. Yet they add up to the valuable final prod-
uct.

THE LAW OF THE IRREDUCIBLE MINIMUM occurs in all delivery
problems. Someone is trying to produce only the visible end product of a post or
production line and neglects the earlier contributory actions and products as these
are not plainly visible.

When an organization or its posts operate only on an irreducible minimum,
production goes bad and DELIVERY crashes.

Take a cook who has his post at an irreducible minimum. Food is appearing
on the table. If he reduced just one bit more the food would no longer be edible
at all. He neglects purchasing, menus and preparation. That these occur is invis-
ible to the diners. That food appears on the table is visible to the diners. If the
cook operates at any less level than he is, no edible food would be visible—
hence, irreducible minimum. The food served will be bad. But it will be visible.
Invisible-to-the-diners actions aren’t being done.

To improve the food, get the less visible actions done. Get the sequence of
actions all done. The result will be improved food.

Take training. The final valuable product is a trained auditor. The Course
Supervisor who runs his post on an irreducible minimum is simply there, appear-
ing to supervise.

His final product may be horribly unskilled. The teaching may take “forever.”

To improve this one goes earlier on the assembly line—materials, packs,
tapes, student tech services, recorder repair, scheduling—dozens of actions in-
cluding getting the Course Supervisor trained.

The visibility is still a Course Supervisor and students being taught. But with
the whole earlier line in, the final valuable product is excellent!

A being hopes lazily for instantaneous production. It doesn’t happen this
way in the MEST universe. Things are produced in a sequence of subproducts
which result in a final valuable product. Hope all you want to. When you omit
the subproducts you get no valuable final product.

When the people in an organization do not know the valuable final products
of the org and when a person on a post does not know the final products of his
post, a condition arises where no org DELIVERY will occur, or if it does occur
it will be poor or costly. It is vital that a person knows what his post final prod-
ucts are and what his unit, section, department and division subproducts are and
how his own and each of these contribute to the valuable final products of the
organization for actual delivery to occur.

Delivering other than valuable final products or useless final products or
final products that need constant correction also adds up to nondelivery.

441
A whole civilization can break down around the point of DELIVERY. So
can an organization.

Since money can be looked upon as too valuable a final product it can actu-
ally prevent DELIVERY.

Failure to deliver is the one point beings do not forgive. The whole cycle
hangs upon DELIVERY.

DELIVER WHAT IS PROMISED when it is expected, in sufficient volume
and adequate quality, is the first maxim even of a group in politics or the humanities.

9. FINANCE

Finance too often disregards the other factors in this scale or the other fac-
tors in this scale too often disregard finance for organizations to long remain
viable.

Financing must be in agreement with all the other factors of this scale and
all the other factors must be in agreement with finance for viability to occur.

Because money is interchangeable for commodities then people can confuse
it with too many things.

If you regard money like so many beans, as a commodity in itself, you open
the door to understanding it.

Money is so many beans in to get so many beans out.
When you can master this you can handle FINANCE.

The FINANCE persons of an org, a civilization, a planet, should put so
many beans in and expect more beans out than they put in. This is quite correct
as a viewpoint for finance.

The difference of beans in and beans out for a planet is made up by adding
beans enough to those already in existence to cover new commodity.

When finance people fail to do this beans cease to be in pace with produc-
tion and inflation and deflation occur.

In an org or any of its parts, industriousness of the staff makes the differ-
ence between the beans in and beans out.

An org has to have income greater than outgo. That is the first rule of fi-
nance. Violating it brings bankruptcy.

Now if the FINANCE people of an org apply the same rule remorselessly to
all its transactions (financial planning) with each person and part of an org,
finance becomes real and manageable.

So many beans in to support the first division means so many beans out of
the org back to finance because of the cooperative work of the first division.

A hectic effort to work only with production products will wind finance up
in a knot.

442
One has to estimate (cost) the contribution of each part of an org to the
valuable final product to know what to allow what part of an org.

Finance has to have a full reality on the valuable final products and the
subproducts and post products of the whole org to intelligently allocate funds.

This person, that division, each contributes some part of the action that re-
sults in the money received for the valuable final products.

So finance can extend so much money for each and expect that and an ad-
ditional amount back.

If this occurs, so will expansion.

Finance comes unstuck when it fails to “cost” an organization and fails to
support valuable final product production.

Finance must not only practice “income greater than outgo” for the org, it
must practice it for each part of the org as well.

Then solvency becomes real.
The greatest aberration of finance is that it seeks to save things into sol-
vency. The real losses in an org are the sums never made. These are the most

important losses for finance to concentrate upon.

An org that makes 500 pounds a week that should make 5000 pounds a week
in potential is losing the finance people 4500 pounds a week!

Finance can force production along certain lines by putting in funds and
getting more back.

Finance becomes too easily the management of an org but it only does that
when it ceases to deal in its own commodity— money.

An org which has executives unfamiliar with finance will fall at once into
the control of the finance people in the org. And these finance people, if they
don’t really know money, will fall at once under the control of outside finance
people.

One has to know finance in any organization anywhere, even in a socialism.
Sooner or later the books get balanced in any society.

10. JUSTICE
Without justice there can be no real organization.

Even a government owes its people an operating climate in which human
transactions and business can occur.

Where insane and criminal individuals operate unchecked in the community,
justice is uncertain and harsh.

The society in which the insane rise to positions of power becomes a nightmare.

443
Justice is a difficult subject. Man handles it badly.
Justice cannot occur until insanity can be detected and cured.

The whole task of justice is to defend the honest man. Therefore the target
of justice is the establishment of a sane society.

The inability to detect or cure the insane destroys civilizations.

Justice is an effort to bring equity and peace. When one cannot detect and
cure insanity then sooner or later justice actions will become unjust and be used
by the insane.

To us, justice is the action necessary to restrain the insane until they are
cured. After that it would be only an action of seeing fair play is done.

11. MORALE

When all factors balance up in an org and give the group a common direc-
tion and mutual viability, morale can be expected to be good.

When the Admin Scale and the ten elements described are out of balance (with-
out proper importance given to each) and when one or many of these (Admin
Scale and the elements herein described) are not in agreement one with another,
then morale will be poor.

Morale is not made of comfort and sloth. It is made of common purpose and
obstacles overcome by the group.

When the Admin Scale and these elements are not held together by similar
aims, then morale has to be held up artificially.

The most ghastly morale I have ever seen was amongst “the idle rich.”

And the highest morale I’ve ever seen was amongst a furiously dedicated,
common-purposed group working under fantastic stresses with very little against
almost hopeless odds.

I used to observe that morale in a combat unit would never materialize before
they had been through hell together.

All drama aside, morale is made up of high purpose and mutual confidence.
This comes from the Admin Scale items and these elements of organization being
well aligned, one with the next, and honest sane endeavor to achieve a final goal
for all.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

444
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 30 DECEMBER 1970

Remimeo
SO Member Hat
Staff Member Hat

Personnel Series 15
Org Series 20

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL

The differences between a competent person and an incompetent person are
demonstrated in his environment (surroundings).

A person is either the effect of his environment or is able to have an effect
upon his environment.

The nineteenth-century psychologist preached that man had to “adjust to his
environment.” This false datum helped begin a racial degeneration.

The truth is that man is as successful as he adjusts the environment to him.

Being competent means the ability to control and operate the things in the
environment and the environment itself.

When you see things broken down around the mechanic who is responsible
for them, he is plainly exhibiting his incompetence—which means his inability to
control those things in his environment and adjust the environment for which he
is responsible — motors.

When you see the mate’s boats broken up, you know he does not have con-
trol of his environment.

Know-how, attention and the desire to be effective are all part of the ability
to control the environment.

One’s ‘“‘standards” (the degree of rightness one is trying to establish and
maintain) are directly related to one’s desire to have a controlled environment.

The attainment of one’s standards is not done by criticism (a human system).
It is done by exerting control of one’s environment and moving things effectively
toward a more ideal scene.

Control of the environment begins with oneself—a good case state, a body
that one keeps clean and functioning. This extends to one’s own gear, his cloth-
ing, tools, equipment. It extends further to the things one is responsible for in the
environment. Then it extends out into the whole environment, the people and the
mest.

One can get pretty dirty fixing things up. That’s okay. But can one then also
clean oneself up?

445
The ability to confront mest is a high ability. After that comes the ability to
handle and control it.

The ability to confront people is also a high ability. After that comes the
ability to get along with them and to handle and control them.

There is the supreme test of a thetan—the ability to make things go right.
The reverse of this is the effort to make things go wrong.
Incompetence—lack of know-how, inability to control—makes things go wrong.

Given some know-how or picking it up by observation, sane people make things
go right.

The insane remain ignorant intentionally or acquire know-how and make things
go wrong.

Insane acts are not unintentional or done out of ignorance. They are inten-
tional; they are not “unknowing dramatizations.” So around insane people things
go wrong.

One cannot tell the difference really between the sane and insane by behav-
ior. One can tell the difference only by the product. The product of the sane is
survival. The product of the insane is an overt act. As this is often masked by
clever explanations, it is not given the attention it deserves. The pretended good
product of the insane turns out to be an overt act.

A large percentage of this planet’s population (undetermined at this time for the
“general public” but in excess of 20%) are insane. Their behavior looks passable.
But their product is an overt act. The popularity of war confirms this. The prod-
ucts of existing governments are mainly destructive. The final product of the
human race will be a destroyed planet (a contaminated air cover rendering the
planet unable to sustain life, whether by radiation or fumes).

Thus, due to the inability to detect and handle the insane, the sane majority
suffers.

The hidden actions of the insane can destroy faster than an environment can
be created UNLESS one has the know-how of the mind and life and the tech of
admin and the ability and know-how to handle mest.

An area or activity hit by an influx of new recruits or new customers tends to
unsettle. Its mest gets abuse, things go out of control.

Gradually, working to put in order, the standards are again being attained.
The minority insane get handled, the know-how of groups and orgs becomes
more generally known, the tech of mest gets used again.

As an organization expands it goes through cycles of lowered condition and
raised condition. This is normal enough since by taking on more and more area
one is letting in more and more insane even though they are in a small propor-
tion to the sane.

446
Order is reestablished and survival trends resumed to the degree that the
sane begin to reach out and handle things around them and as the insane are
made sane.

Thus one gets downtrends and uptrends. As soon as a group begins to feel
cocky, it takes on more area. This includes more unhandled people, admin and
mest and a downtrend begins. Then the sane begin to handle and the insane
begin to be sane and the uptrend starts.

This is probably even the basis of national economic booms and depressions.

This is only bad to the degree that the insane are put in charge. As soon as
this happens the downtrend becomes permanent and cultural decay sets in.

A group expanding rapidly into a decadent culture is of course itself sub-
jected to the uptrend—downtrend cycles and has to take very special measures to
counteract the consequences of expansion in order to maintain any rate of
growth.

The individual member of a group can measure his own progress by in-
creased ability to handle himself, his post and environment and the degree of
improvement of the group itself because of his own work within it.

A group that is messing up its gear and environment worse than it did a
while ago and is not improving it of course has to be reorganized before it per-
ishes.

No group can sit back and expect its high brass to be the only ones to carry
the load. The group is composed of individual group members, not of high brass.

The survival of a group depends upon the ability of its individual members
to control their environment and to insist that the other group members also con-
trol theirs.

This is the stuff of which survival is made.

A sane group, knowing and using their technologies of handling men and
mest, cannot help but control their environment.

But this depends upon the individual group member being sane, able to con-
trol his mest and those around him and using the tech of life, the tech of admin,
the tech of specific types of activity.

Such a group inevitably inherits the culture and its guidance.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

447
Remimeo

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 27 DECEMBER 1970

HCO Area Sec

Dir RAP
Hats Officer

The
1.

kr Ww N

Oo we NY HB MN

10.

ll.

12.

Personnel Series 16

HATS PROGRAM PITFALLS

main outnesses about hats are:

Personnel having a hat and title but doing some other job or jobs.

. Personnel falling between two divs or posts and being in neither.
. Personnel having no hat at all.

. Personnel unable to even cope because people around them don’t have

hats.

. Hats matching an org board but the org board itself is disorganized.

. Personnel holding a part-time hat but no other hat even though full time.
. Hats lost in post turnovers and no complete hat file.

. The only other copy in the hat file issued and also lost.

. Org pattern changes which make hats unreal.

Juniors trying to wear their hats but a senior, being unaware of them,
issuing different orders.

Seniors trying to wear their hats but juniors unaware of them and mak-
ing different demands.

Personnel moving off not replaced, leaving others in the organization to
carry a load for which they have no hat.

. Missing ideal scene for hat.

. Missing general ideal scene for division.

. No concept of the scene at all.

. A person just not doing his hat.

. Checksheet and/or pack missing or incomplete for post.

. Missing any part of full hat content per HCO PL 22 Sept. 70, HATS.

. Hat checksheet contains (a) omissions (too short); (b) highly irrelevant

data; (c) doesn’t belong to the post.

448
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

Counter-policy present in hat write-up.

Seniors issue counter-policy in despatches or verbally.

Senior not grooving personnel in on post or seeing to proper hat study.
Valuable final product missing for hat.

Purpose and/or valuable final product missing in hat for group's whole
activity.

An earlier or more basic hat is out such as a top executive not knowing
the basic staff hat fully.

Nonutilization in any of its various forms such as a personnel trained for
one thing is required to do something else. Or his training is not used,
Or he is not used at all.

If the Hats Officer can do his job and not get caught up in these pitfalls,
we'll really soar.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

449
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 JANUARY 1971

Remimeo

Personnel Series 17
Org Series 21

DUPLICATING FUNCTIONS

All you have to do to run out of personnel, finance and get no production is
to duplicate the same functions that give the same product in an org.

Take three orgs side by side under the same management. Only if each divi-
sion of each org had entirely different products would this be possible.

Now let’s do it wrong. Each of these three orgs has an HCO and full per-
sonnel duties. Each separately promotes. Each has its own finance office, each
has its production div producing the same products. Each has its own correction div
—the place in general would be very overmanned, yet each div would be under-
manned for its full functions. The product would be terrible if it existed at all.
Morale would be ghastly, inter-org collisions continual.

The right way would be to work out the different products and then assign
them to one or another of these orgs. One org would have to be the source org
that produced the other two. One org would have all the finance with liaison only
in the other two orgs. One org would have to hire, hat and train with only liaison in
the other two. The orgs would have org boards which had the function but under
it would be the note “Liaison with ________——_—«,”-_ source org.

In the impatience and emotion of organizing one org tends to individuate and
establish a duplicate function because ‘it can’t get service.” This begins the
catastrophe. Now they'll all begin to go broke while having men bulging out of
the windows.

In looking over potential insolvency, look over duplicate functions.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

450
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 10 FEBRUARY 1971

Remimeo Issue IT]

CO Hat

HAS Hat

Dept | Hats

Dept 3 Hats

HCO Checksheets

E/O Hat Personnel Series 18

Adds to Personnel Series 8,
HCO PL 16 Sept. 70,
ETHICS AND PERSONNEL
(Applies to E/Os)

An I&R Form 1 (HCO PL 6 Oct. 70, INSPECTION OF LOW STATS) must be
done by Inspections and Reports on the dept or div or activity that is demanding
personnel, at the request of Personnel, Dept 1.

When the I&R Form | is done by the Inspector (be it the Ethics Officer or an-
other) the additional questions on Personnel Series 8, A-H, are covered by the
Ethics Officer who personally gets the answers to them.

His answers are added to the I&R Form 1, together with any ethics actions
proposed.

In this case the routing of the I&R Form | is Inspector to E/O to Personnel.

Personnel adds his recommendations regarding either (a) to expedite needful
personnel or (b) to demand utilization of existing personnel.

The I&R Form 1, with the E/O’s added report and Personnel’s added rec-
ommendations then follows the routing as laid down on the form, and the stand-
ard procedure for the form is carried out.

WITHOUT THE AUTHORIZATION OF THE EXEC DIR OR HCO ES
FOR THE ACTIONS RECOMMENDED ON THE I&R FORM |, NO TRANS-
FER OR ASSIGNMENT MAY TAKE PLACE AT ALL. THE EXEC DIR OR
HCO ES MAY ORIGINATE ORDERS ON THE PERSONNEL REQUEST BUT
SUCH ORDERS MUST BE BASED ON THE COMPLETED I&R FORM | WITH
E/O REPORT AND PERSONNEL RECOMMENDATION TO HAND AND
THESE DOCUMENTS MUST ACCOMPANY SUCH ORIGINATED ORDERS
BEFORE THE HCO AREA SEC IS EMPOWERED TO ISSUE AND ENFORCE
THEM.

No more than 24 hours should be allowed from the receipt in Dept 3 of
Personnel’s request for I&R Form | to the receipt of the completed action by the
HCO Area Sec.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Assisted by
LRH Pers Comm

451
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 16 MARCH 1971
Remimeo Issue IV

Org Series 25

Personnel Series 19

LINES AND HATS

It will be found that in organization there are MANY major factors involved.

The following three, however, give the most problems:

1. Personnel

2. Hats

3. Lines.

Technology is a subdivision of both personnel (who may have to be specially
trained before they can be considered personnel) and hats (which are mainly ad-

min technology and line functions).

To solve any problem, one has to recognize what the problem is. One cannot
solve problem A by trying to solve problem B or C. Example: Problem: broken-
down car. You cannot fix the car by repairing the kitchen lino. Example: You cannot
floor the kitchen by fixing the car.

All this may seem obvious when obviously stated. But there is a more subtle
version. ANY PROBLEM THAT DOES NOT SOLVE IS NOT THE PROBLEM.
There must be some other problem.

Locating and isolating situations (problems) in an organization is the tech-
nique of the Data Series. That technology will find for one the problem that
should be solved.

As there are three major organizational] factors these then also form the core
of all organizational situations (or problems, same thing).

Each one of these is its own zone—personnel, hats, lines.

Each one has its own problems. There are situations in personnel. There are
situations in hats. There are situations in lines.

They are related. They are not identical.
You will find you cannot wholly solve a problem in lines by solving person-

nel. You cannot wholly solve a problem in hats by solving lines. You cannot
wholly solve a problem in personnel by solving the other two.

452
Example: Production hours are down. Fifteen new personnel are added to
the area. Production stays down. It was a problem in lines.

Example: Confusion reigns in the pipe shop. The lines are carefully straightened
out. Confusion still reigns. It was a problem in hats.

Example: Broken products are wrecking org repute. Hats are carefully put
on. Products continue to be broken. It was a problem in personnel.

Example: The org stays small. Executives work harder. The org stays small.
It was a series of problems in personnel, hats and lines, none addressed at all.

You will see symptoms of all this in various guises. The test of whether or
not the right problem was found is whether or not production increased in vol-
ume, quality and viability.

In actual practice one works on all three of these factors constantly—
personnel, hats and lines—when one is organizing.

You will find with some astonishment that failure to have or know or wear or
do a hat is the commonest reason why lines do not go in. That personnel is hard
to procure and train because hats and lines are being knocked out. That hats
can’t be worn because lines or personnel are out.

Situations get worsened by solving the wrong problem instead of the real
problem. In the Data Series this is called finding the right Why.

Organizational problems center around these three things in the broadest
general sense. More than one can be present in any situation.

Production problems are concerned with the particles which flow on the
lines, changed by the hatted personnel, with consumption and general viability.
So to make a full flow from organization through to distribution, one would add
raw materials, changed state of materials and their consumption. Organization is
not an end-all. To have value it must result in production.

But when personnel, hats and lines are not solved, production is very
difficult. Therefore to get production one must have an organization to back it
up. And personnel, hats and lines must exist and be functional. If these exist, the
rest of the factors of establishment can be brought into being.

It goes without saying that organization involves other problems like space,
materiel, finance, etc. These and many more also enter into ‘“Whys” of no
production. But dominating others are problems in personnel, hats and lines.
Others tend to solve if these are handled and organized.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

453
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 MARCH 1971R

Issue I
REVISED 21 JANUARY 199]

Remimeo

Personnel Series 20R

PERSONNEL PREDICTION

Sudden and unauthorized transfers of personnel for whatever reason disrupt
hats and lines. Every such transfer is a failure to predict concerning personnel.

By a few transfers (“musical chairs”), an area can be totally unmocked.

Personnel people tend to undervalue the time and care necessary to train, hat
and apprentice people.

Even a small unit is a “working installation” if it produces. An order to
“turn over the hat this morning and take another post” is quite unreal.

Prediction is the button that is usually out in personnel handling.

How many will we need in ______ weeks or months? is the key question. It
is the one Personnel should continually work on. Stressing only “‘Who can we
assign to 2?” shows a lack of prediction.

Man tends to run in today and seldom in tomorrow much less next week or
year. The fault will someday destroy him as a species. He is even unable to predict
the fate of his habitat, the planet.

Thus Personnel should be very wary of this fault.

Recruiting for tomorrow instead of yesterday, people in full-time training, future
executives being sorted out by today’s performance, all add up to good predic-
tion by Personnel people.

One must catch up the backlog of yesterday’s needs by gradual moving up
into the future.

Every key post should have a deputy in training or in apprenticeship for the
post. By key post is meant one that has urgent responsibility and great expertise.

Personnel will see where it stands by just listing their current answers to
these questions:

1. What are the key posts of the org or activity that require great expertise
and training? From top to bottom list them out.

2. How many of the above list have people in training or apprenticeship for
them?

454
3. What will be the personnel scene on these posts in one year?
4. What plans did you have yesterday to do this?
5. What plans can be made now to do this?

Having actually done the above questions, one will see what prediction con-
sists of regarding personnel and a sample of what it means to predict.

This should be done at full org level and then at divisional level and then at
department level.

Then one will see that sudden transfers done without training or apprentice-
ship can be avoided in the future at key levels IF ONE PROGRAMS IT NOW.
And then ACTS to make the program work out.

Where prediction is out, expansion becomes impossible to do without collapse.
For one has to predict expansion as well.
An action on expansion would be:

1. To increase the org’s stats five times (GDSes and GI) how many more
trained, hatted people would be needed:

a. In the CO or ED Office?

b. In HCO?
c. In Div 2?
d. In Div 3?

e. In Dept of Training?

f. In the HGC?

g. In Qual?

h. In the Distribution Division?
i. In the LRH Comm Office?
j. In the Estate area?

k. In the Dept of Special Affairs?

1. In space?

m. In furniture?

n. In equipment?

o. In decoration?

p. Finance?

q. Personnel care (food, shelter, clothes)?

While the last (1 to q) are not properly “Personnel” the personnel action
would collide with them so hard that personnel action would be stopped. “Do not
hire anyone else!” “Do not...” “Do not...”

455
So somebody says, “We are going to boost the GI from $100 to $50,000.”
Well, to do that one would have to promote and deliver as well as make money.
So, when such a prediction is made, what does a good Personnel Officer do?

He does the computations outlined in this policy letter and any other that
seem indicated and says, ““There you are, chums. This is my part of the deal and
(presenting a plan) this is how I'll go about it, to hire, recruit, get trained and ap-
prenticed the needful personnel. Now what are YOU doing about (1) to (q) in this PL
so you don’t stop my progress doing my job of getting you eighty additional, func-
tional, useful, nongoofing, producing staff?”

This wakes up the prediction elsewhere so Personnel’s prediction doesn’t fall
down plop.

Once the action is begun, part of the prediction is that it will require contin-
uous guiding, handling and pounding to make it come true.

For instance, it can be predicted that as Personnel loads them in, there will
be failures to program, hat, train, apprentice and utilize. One Personnel loaded
an org full and a month later fifty-seven nonutilized, nonassigned people were
combed out of the debris. “But they are so new... .” “But you can’t as-
sign. . . .” etc., etc. And Personnel got blamed for recruiting “unsuitable peo-
ple.” Because the hatting, training, apprenticing actions were neglected! You can
only recruit untrained people, really.

So Personnel regards unutilized people as a backlog on his lines. Recruited
not utilized means he still has them as they have not “fed into the org.”

‘Prove you have used what I got. Show me the programing of their training?
How many have hats? How many are apprenticed?” These are legitimate Person-
ne] questions. And they are demands.

Until utilized, personnel are regarded as still on Personnel’s plate no matter
where they’ve gotten to in the org.

Otherwise, Personnel is pounded, pounded for people, people, people when
the halls are impassable with nonutilized personnel.

Yet I’ve never heard a Personnel man say, “What'd you do with the guys I
got you last week?” It would produce some blushes.

Personnel aren’t personnel really until they are utilized.

’

Hectic transfers from working posts, “musical chairs,” all come from lack

of personnel programs based on predictions.

When programs are made and are in action, a failure to predict probable
failures to hat, train, apprentice, post, is a legitimate prediction and should be
watched carefully and corrected by Personnel.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Revision assisted by
LRH Research and
Technical Compilations

456
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 JULY 1971

Remimeo Issue I

Org Series 28

Personnel Series 21

WHY HATTING?

A few days ago when I found that musical chairs and flubbed hatting had
unstabilized some areas, I wondered whether or not this might stem from some
social aberration that was very general in the societies in which we are working.

And it seems to have been the case. I worked on it a bit and found this:

LAW: THE POWER OF A THETAN STEMS FROM HIS ABILITY TO
HOLD A POSITION IN SPACE.

This is quite true. In Scientology 8-80 the base of the motor is discussed. It
holds two terminals in fixed positions. Because they are so fixed, power can be
generated.

If a thetan can hold a position or location in space he can generate POWER.
If he cannot, he cannot generate power and will be weak.
We have known this for nineteen years. It applies here.

Observation: MODERN SOCIETY TENDS TO CONFUSE AND UNSTA-
BILIZE PERSONS WITH ITS HECTIC PACE.

Observation: BEINGS WHO ARE AFRAID OF STRONG PEOPLE TRY
TO WEAKEN THEM.

Observation: PERSONS WHO ARE PUSHED AROUND FEEL THEY CAN-
NOT HOLD A POSITION IN SPACE.

Observation: PEOPLE HATE TO LOSE THEIR POSTS AND JOBS.
THEY FIND IT DEGRADING.

In processing, picking up this chain of lost positions achieves very good
gains and rehabilitates a person’s ability to hold a job.

LAW: BY GIVING A PERSON A POST OR POSITION, HE IS SOME-
WHAT STRENGTHENED AND MADE MORE CONFIDENT IN
LIFE.

LAW: BY LETTING A PERSON RETAIN HIS POST, HE IS MADE
MORE SECURE.

457
LAW: BY HATTING A PERSON, HE IS GREATLY STRENGTHENED
AS HE IS HELPED TO HOLD HIS POST.

A basically insecure person who feels he is unable to hold his position in
space is sufficiently strengthened by hatting to feel secure enough to do his job.

LAW: HAVING A HAT, BEING HATTED AND DEMONSTRATING COM-
PETENCE MAKES A PERSON FEEL CAPABLE OF HOLDING
HIS POSITION IN SPACE AND HE BECOMES MORE STABLE,
CONFIDENT IN LIFE AND MORE POWERFUL.

LAW: UNHATTED PERSONS ON A POST CAN BECOME CRIMINAL
ON THE POST BECAUSE THEY FEEL INSECURE AND BE-
COME WEAK.

When a person is secretly afraid of others, he instinctively will not hat them
or hats them wrongly and tends to transfer or move them about.

When a person is insecurely posted and insufficiently hatted, he can try to
weaken others by trying to prevent their hatting and trying to get them trans-
ferred or even dismissed.

This is apparently the social aberration at work.

The answer to a sane org and a sane society is not welfare and removal. It is:

Recruit them

Train them

Hat them

Apprentice them

Give them a post.

This is so strong in truth it would de-aberrate the bulk of the crime out of a
society.

And it sure will put an org in POWER.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

458
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 11 AUGUST 1971

Remimeo Issue II

Personnel Series 22
DON’T UNMOCK A WORKING INSTALLATION

The stable rule of a good HAS or HCO Cope Officer is NEVER UNMOCK
A WORKING INSTALLATION.

It takes a lot of executive time and effort to build up a section or dept or
division.

For someone to then come along and scramble it up with transfers is a crimi-
nal action.

If a unit, section, dept or division is operating well, don’t unmock it.

Strengthen it. Hat it better. Put apprentices in it opposite to its posts to
learn. Give it help.

But DON’T SCRAMBLE IT.

oF be

The work of years can be destroyed overnight by “urgent,
action.

vital” personnel

Such crazy actions are only done by people too lazy to recruit and train new
people or by unreal financial planning or a failure to get it to produce.

THE MAIN REASON WE HAVE EVER HAD SLUMPS HAS BEEN UN-
MOCKING ORGS OR UNITS.

Firing people, too heavy ethics, putting off people as “PTS” when all you
needed was to pull their withholds, a thousand reasons can be given for unmock-
ing an org or its parts.

They are all coverups for execs who won’t keep the place busy and for HCO
failures to recruit, train and hat.

To do so is a sign of insanity.
People like their jobs.
DON’T UNMOCK A WORKING INSTALLATION.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Personnel Series 23 and 24

(Note: Personnel Series 23 and 24 no longer exist as numbered issues in this series. These numbers were
earlier assigned to issues that were not written by L. Ron Hubbard and have since been cancelled. ]

459
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 12 MAY 1972R
Remimeo REVISED 27 OCTOBER 1982

Int Finance Network
for Enforcement

ETHICS

Executive Series 13R
Finance Series 12R
Personnel Series 25R

PTS PERSONNEL AND FINANCE

PTS means Potential Trouble Source. This is a person who is connected to a
suppressive person, group or thing. (For further data on PTSness see HCOB 24
Nov. 65, SEARCH AND DISCOVERY, and HCO PL 27 Oct. 64, POLICIES ON
PHYSICAL HEALING, INSANITY AND POTENTIAL TROUBLE SOURCES.)

NCG means No Case Gain despite good and sufficient auditing.

A chronically ill person, whether the person is known to be connected to a
suppressive or not, is always found to have been so connected and PTS.

IT IS UNSHAKEABLE POLICY HEREAFTER THAT NO PERSON WHO
IS PTS OR CHRONICALLY ILL OR WHO GETS NO CASE GAIN MAY BE

ON FINANCE OR REGISTRAR LINES OR IN TOP COMMAND POSTS OR
AS HAS OR ETHICS OFFICER OR MAA.

TECHNICAL FACT

A person who is connected to a suppressive person, group or thing will drama-
tize a “can’t-have” or an ‘“‘enforced overt-have” on an org or staff members.

A “can’t-have” means just that—a depriving of substance or action or
things.

An “enforced overt-have” means forcing upon another a substance, action or
thing not wanted or refused by the other.

The technical fact is that a PTS person got that way because the suppressive
was suppressive by depriving the other or enforcing unwanted things upon the
person.

The PTS person will dramatize this characteristic in reaction to the suppression.

Therefore, a PTS person as an ED, CO, product officer, org officer, Treas-
ury Sec, Cashier or Body Reg will run a can’t-have on the org and its staff by:

460
a. Refusing income,

b. Wasting income made,

c. Accepting wrong customers (like psychos) and forcing them on the org,
d. Fail to provide staff or service,

e. Advocate overt products.

HISTORICAL

When staffs went on proportionate pay in the late 1950s, so long as I ran the
orgs directly the staffs made more money than before.

When I moved off these lines directly, the staffs began to receive less money
personally.

At that time it seemed to me that proportionate pay served as an excuse to
some in an org to run a can’t-have on the staff.

We knew that some Registrars could take money in easily and others never
seemed to be able to.

The technical reason for this has just emerged in another line of research
entirely.

In completing materials and search on Expanded Dianetics, I was working
on the mechanism of how a PTS person remained ill.

I found suppressives became so to the person by running a “can’t-have” and
“enforced overt-have.” This pinned the PTS person to the suppressive.

Working further I found that a PTS person was a robot to the suppressive.
(See HCOB 10 May 72, ROBOTISM)

This research was in the direction of making people well.

Suddenly it was apparent that a PTS person, as a robot to SPs, will run
“can’t-haves” and “enforced overt-haves” on others.

Checking rapidly, it was found that where finance lines were very sour a
PTS person was on those lines.

RECOVERY

PTS tech, Objective Processes, PTS Rundowns, Money Processes and Ex-
panded Dianetics will handle the condition.

However, one cannot be sure that it has been handled expertly in orgs where
a money ‘“‘can’t-have” has been run as its tech quality will be low due to an
already existing lack of finance.

Only stats would tell if the situation has been handled fully.

461
Thus the policy stands. Handled or not handled, no person who is PTS or
who has no case gain will be permitted in top command or any lines that influ-
ence finance.

Any org which has consistently low income should be at once suspect of
having PTS or NCG persons on the key finance posts, and an immediate action
should be taken to discover the PTS or NCG condition and replace such persons
with those who are not connected to suppressives or who do get case gain.

Nothing in this policy letter permits any PTS person to be in an org or
cancels any policy with regard to PTS.

This policy letter requires direct check, close investigation and handling of
PTS or SP situations on these posts that may go undetected otherwise.

NOTHING IN THIS POLICY LETTER PERMITS ANY KEY ORG POST
TO REMAIN EMPTY.

NATIONAL

As a comment on something that may impinge on orgs and might affect
them, the FOREMOST reason for a failing national prosperity and inflation is a
personal income tax agency. This runs a vicious can’t-have on every citizen and
makes them PTS to the government. Individuals even begin to run a can’t-have
on themselves and do not produce. This IS the cause of a failing national econ-
omy. It can be a factor in an org and must be handled on the individuals so
affected.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

Revision written at the

request of the

CHURCH OF SCIENTOLOGY
INTERNATIONAL

Personnel Series 26

[Note: Personnel Series 26 no longer exists as a numbered issue in this series. This series number was
earlier assigned to an issue not written by L. Ron Hubbard. This issue has since been cancelled. ]

Personnel Series 27

(Note: Personnel Series 27 does not exist as a numbered issue in this series. The number was earlier
assigned to an issue which was written by L. Ron Hubbard but, unlike the other policies in this series,
was not written to be specifically issued in this series and has therefore been removed from it.]

462
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 14 NOVEMBER 1976

Remimeo
Flag Bu

All Orgs

Ext HCO FB

Admin Know-How Series 36
Org Series 36
Executive Series 18

Personnel Series 28

MANNING UP AN ORG
The Sequence of Posting Depts and Divs

You need an org board first and an allocation board.
The sequence in which an org is manned up is roughly:
— Dept 1

— Dept 11

— Reg and Body Routers and Intro people in Div 6

— Dept !2 (enough auditors and C/Ses to approach 2 admin to | tech in org)
— Dept 6

— Dept 7

— Dept 3

— SSO and Supers in Qual to train staff

— Dept 5 for CF, Address and Letter Reges

— Dept 4 for promo

— Dept 21 (LRH Comm)

— Dept 10

— Dept 20

— FR and execs

— Full Div 6

463
— Full Div 1
— Full Div 4
— Full Div 2
— Full Div 5
— Full Div 7
— Full Div 3

(Note, an AO always mans up the AO Dept or Div along with the SH one in
each case.)

Wrong sequence of manning is Dept 6, Dept 12, Dept 6, Dept 12, Dept 6,
Dept 12, as you wind up with a stuck clinic that won’t expand.

Wrong sequence will contract an org while trying to expand it, as the org
will go out of balance, bad units, noisy and unproductive.

If manned in a correct sequence, its income has a chance to stay abreast of
its new staff additions.

Emphasis on GI without comparable emphasis on delivery and organization
can throw an org into such a spin only a genius can run it.

Manned in proper sequence, and hatted as it goes, an org almost runs itself.

Single handing from the top comes from longstanding failures to man or
man in sequence, from earlier noncompliance with explicit orders or from not
understanding orgs in the first place.

An unhappy org that doesn’t produce has usually been manned only partially
and out of sequence.

The trick is planned manning, ignoring the screams of those who know best
or demand personnel; just manning by posting those who have been screamed for
the loudest is a sure way to wind up with no people and total org problems
instead of a total org that is prosperous and producing.

Incidently, this is a rough approximation of the sequence of hats the ED
gradually unloads as his org takes over.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

464
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 NOVEMBER 1978

Remimeo
Admin Know-How Series 37
Personnel Series 29
HOW YOU HANDLE DEMANDS FOR PERSONNEL
Refs:
HCO PL 15 Sept. 59 II HATS AND OTHER FOLDERS
HCO PL 1 July 65 II HATS, THE REASON FOR
HCO PL 22 Sept. 70 HATS

HCOs get continual demands for personnel from all areas of an org. To keep
an HCO from going mad with all these demands, they must, on every request,
(1) have the Dir of I&R do a full utilization survey on the division, dept or sec-
tion requesting personnel and (2) do a full hat inspection on all personnel in that
division, dept or section.

Only if these two steps are done for each personnel request will sanity reign
in HCOs on the subject of personnel.

HCO PL 15 Sept. 59 , HATS AND OTHER FOLDERS (Vol 0), HCO PL
1 July 65 Ill, HATS, THE REASON FOR (Vol 0) and HCO PL 22 Sept. 70,
HATS (Vol 0) must be well known by all staff in Depts 1 and 3.

Personnel can recruit madly, answering every frantic demand for personnel,
and yet HAVE THEM ALL WASTED for lack of full hats and full training on
those hats.

The whole org can sag and even vanish under these conditions.

So Personnel has a vested interest in hats being complete and staff trained on
them. For Personnel people cannot possibly cope with ‘‘no pay so can’t hire
anyone” and “no people so can’t produce.”

So for every demand for personnel, ALWAYS demand a utilization survey
AND an inspection of hats in that area.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

465
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 29 MARCH 1982

Remimeo

Personnel Series 30

PERSONNEL POLICY

We are building strongly for the future.
Scientology is going to go on for a VERY long time.
The way to build a strong future is to build a strong organization.

Internally, the only way we have been held back is by out-ethics and nonpro-
duction. This does not build a strong organization or a strong future.

Therefore, we have no room on staffs for those who do not produce—or
worse, are extravagant and produce overt products—or (which goes with poor
production) are out-ethics.

We need productive people who keep their ethics in.

Individuals, and above all execs, are the building blocks of organizations.

To build strongly for the future, keep the above points in mind where ap-
pointing, promoting or handling personnel.

Personnel of that caliber belong outside orgs—they are the pcs and cases. Do
not recruit them, appoint them or leave them on post when found.

One can mend people. But one cannot build a new world with broken straws.

It takes the ethical few to handle the many. And these are what our orgs must
be built with now. The strong within only then can handle the weak outside.

Make it easy in the future for all of us. We have a long way to go. The speed
we get there is measured by the ethical quality of persons on exec posts and on
staffs. It is fine to be big brother to all the world—so long as we keep our staffs
the top people. Be them.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

466
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 19 DECEMBER 1982

All Orgs Issue I
All Execs

All Staff

All Div Heads

LRH Comms

HCO

Dept | Hats

Dept 3 Hats

Personnel Series 31
Org Series 45

“DOING A QUICKSILVER” FORBIDDEN

Refs:

HCO PL 19 Mar. 71 Personne! Series 20
PERSONNEL PREDICTION

HCO PL 24 June 70R II PERSONNEL POOLS

Rev. 30.4.75

HCO PL 7 Jan. 66 LEAVING POST, WRITING YOUR HAT

HCO PL 20 Apr. 69 II HATS, NOT WEARING

HCO PL 20 Aug. 71 MUSICAL CHAIRS

HCO PL 11 Aug. 71 II Personnel Series 22
DON'T UNMOCK A WORKING
INSTALLATION

HCO PL 7 Mar. 65 III OFFENSES AND PENALTIES

HCO PL 13 July 741 Org Series 34

WORKING INSTALLATIONS

There is a condition that can exist in orgs which differs slightly from “mu-
sical chairs” (the rapid transfer of personnel from post to post) but is akin to that
and every bit as deadly.

We could call it a “quicksilver personnel” scene.

(“Quicksilver” is another name for mercury, the silvery-white metallic
element, liquid at room temperature, which is used in thermometers, ba-
rometers and similar instruments.)

Used figuratively, the term ‘“‘quicksilver” means something that is quick-
moving, unpredictable and as elusive as mercury, or “mercurial.” Something that
is mercurial is changeable, variable, volatile.

To anyone who has ever observed a drop of quicksilver, or mercury, in an
open container or placed on a slab of glass, this will be real. One second it’s
here, the next second it’s there. Just about all you have to do is breathe on it and
it changes its position. And where it was a second ago there’s now nothing.

It is miserable (if not impossible) for an executive or management body try-

ing to run things with staff doing a quicksilver. One can hit up against some
nasty surprises.

467
For example, an org’s personnel scene may look great on the board, with
posts filled, hats existing and known, production occurring and on the rise—all
is looking good when suddenly the stats crash.

An initial check may show there haven’t honestly been any post transfers,
per se. But dig a bit further and you’re likely to find a quicksilver personnel
scene. The top delivery auditor is off on a two-week vacation. The Qual Sec has
been fired on a recruitment tour. The Reg has gone out-ethics and been sus-
pended, unreplaced, pending some ethics handling. The Chief Officer is off on
maternity leave and the CO, holding her post from above, is being the guest
speaker at an event in the next city.

It happens and it happens not only in Class IV Orgs but in the higher service
orgs and management units where tours are essential and missions need to be
fired and other situations can crop up requiring personnel.

It has shown up drastically at times in several large orgs. In one, the head of
a vital network went off on mission and, with no one left being the senior, the
stats in the area crashed. In another, the sales manager took his leave, his routine
functions were ignored and sales suffered severely. And in still another org, no
less than six key delivery terminals were all found to be out on regging tours in
one week, some of them over a period of several weeks, at a time when delivery
of paid-in-full services was backlogged!

None of these terminals had been removed or transferred or promoted. And
one could say the actions being done are all covered in some way in policy, are
needed, and therefore justified. But these terminals were all off post unreplaced,
weren’t they?

That’s a quicksilver personnel scene. It’s unstable.

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS

Executives who issue orders that unmock working installations where pro-
duction is occurring at “A” to get something done at “X” bring about such
scenes.

Personnel who, like quicksilver, accommodatingly move off their assigned
posts unreplaced to do something else at the first invitation or order, help to
generate and sustain such scenes.

Seniors who permit or condone this are also a party to them.

Personnel can do a quicksilver for any of a number of reasons. For some, the
chance to go off and see other people and new places may be an alluring pros-
pect. Some are too timid to refuse a destructive order and so they comply, under
protest. For others there is financial gain involved—there are often commissions
or a bonus at stake.

Tours have been used by some, apparently condoned by executives, to take
longer leaves (more time off on leave per year) by combining 4 to 6 or even 8
weeks of a “regging tour” with a “leave,” with the org paying both the person’s
fare and living expenses and no clear distinction made between the period of

468
“tour” and the period of the “leave.”’ (While this is part of an unstable personnel
scene, it is also a situation requiring a separate ethics handling in itself.)

Sometimes a staff member is made to feel, by a very convincing exec, that
the action which calls for his suddenly going off post with no or inadequate
replacement is actually more important than his job. Where this threatens pro-
duction and there is no adequate replacement, this is almost always a falsehood.

It is true that missions need to be fired. Tours are vital to income and deliv-
ery. Staff sometimes do need to go off post temporarily for handling of one type
or another. Events are valuable in terms of promotion, goodwill, PR and sign-
ups; and for certain types of these, key personnel or trained tech delivery person-
nel may be required. Emergencies do arise. Personnel are entitled to annual
leave. And speed of operations is important.

On the plus side, we do have capable and versatile staff who are willing to
extend themselves, when needed, to make things go right. We have demanding,
fire-breathing executives who are out to handle situations and open up new fields
for delivery which, in itself, is a good thing. And many of these go about it
standardly.

But the senior or exec at any level who endangers ongoing delivery and pro-
duction and/or unstabilizes a producing personnel scene to get these things done
is simply advertising to one and all that he can’t predict and plan and organize or
get others to do so. Control is lacking here as well as just plain common sense.
The kindest thing one could say about such an exec is that he is short-sighted.
And “quicksilver” is a rather mild term for the staff member who steps so easily
off his post and leaves a hole in the lineup with no thought of the consequences.

One could say that everyone has personnel problems. BUT that is no Why.

HANDLING “QUICKSILVER PERSONNEL” SCENES

The first policies missing in application are those covering replacements and
hat turnovers.

BECAUSE IT IS A “TEMPORARY” ABSENCE, NO ONE IS DEMAND-
ING REPLACEMENT AND TURNING THE HAT OVER TO SOMEONE
WHO CAN COVER THE POST COMPETENTLY.

But policies exist in abundance on this subject. HCO PL 29 Aug. 70 I, Per-
sonnel Series 1, PERSONNEL TRANSFERS CAN DESTROY AN ORG, points
up the outnesses which can destroy an org faster than any others. HCO PL 7 Jan.
66, LEAVING POST, WRITING YOUR HAT, covers the staff member’s respon-
sibility for a post he is vacating under any circumstances. HCO PL 20 Apr. 69 II,
HATS, NOT WEARING, emphasizes the staff member’s responsibility for
knowing that he is the Qual Sec, or Reg, or the post title for the post and func-
tions he has accepted. HCO PL 11 Aug. 71 II, Personnel Series 22, DON’T
UNMOCK A WORKING INSTALLATION, cites the main reason we have ever had
slumps in orgs.

The personnel policies are there. But very often, where a “quicksilver per-
sonnel” scene is permitted, BECAUSE SOMEONE PULLS OFF A SUCCESS

469
IN ONE AREA, EVEN THOUGH STATS IN HIS OWN AREA MAY CRASH,
THE EXISTING ETHICS POLICIES THAT COVER SUCH A CRASH OR
THE COLLAPSE OF AN AREA MAY BE OVERLOOKED OR DELIBER-
ATELY IGNORED.

So how do we handle “quicksilver personnel” scenes?

The answer is to add some teeth to the existing policies:

l.

AN ABSENCE FROM POST FOR EVEN A TEMPORARY PERIOD
OF AS LITTLE AS HALF A WEEK IS AN ETHICS OFFENSE, UN-
LESS SOMEONE IS NAMED AND THERE AS A REPLACEMENT
WHO HAS HAD THE POST PROPERLY TURNED OVER TO HIM
AND WHO CAN COVER THE POST COMPETENTLY.

IF SUCH ABSENCE WITHOUT COMPETENT REPLACEMENT OC-
CURS AT ALL, AN IMMEDIATE COURT OF ETHICS MUST BE
CALLED ON THE STAFF MEMBER WHO LEAVES HIS POST UN-
FILLED OR INADEQUATELY COVERED, AS WELL AS ON THE
SENIOR OR EXECUTIVE ORDERING, CONDONING OR PERMIT-
TING IT.

IF IT OCCURS AND RESULTS IN STATS CRASHING IN A COURSE,
A DIVISION, DEPARTMENT, SECTION, UNIT, AREA, ZONE OR
ORG, A COMMITTEE OF EVIDENCE MUST BE CALLED WITH
ALL INVOLVED NAMED AS INTERESTED PARTIES.

The charges are:

CONDONING OR CONTRIBUTING TO CIRCUMSTANCES OR_ OF-
FENSES CAPABLE OF BRINGING A COURSE, SECTION, UNIT, DE-
PARTMENT, ORG, ZONE OR DIVISION TO A STATE OF COLLAPSE

and

NEGLECT OF RESPONSIBILITIES RESULTING IN A CATASTROPHE
EVEN WHEN ANOTHER MANAGES TO AVERT THE FINAL CONSE-
QUENCES.

With this policy made known and enforced, there is a cure for those who do
a “quicksilver” and for executives and seniors whose out-planning and out-
prediction bring about quicksilver personnel scenes.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

470
Remimeo
Execs
HCO
Qual

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 28 MARCH 1984
Issue I]

Personnel Series 32

Executive Series 28

EXECUTIVE POSTING QUALIFICATIONS

(This policy letter was originally issued, in 1984, as Executive Series 40.
A number of other PLs were earlier incorrectly included as part of the
Executive Series and have now been deleted from the series. As a result,
this policy is reissued as Executive Series 28.)

Scientology organizations and their staffs in the past have been subjected to
considerable financial losses by appointing to executive positions persons of poor
ethics and production records. Therefore this firm policy regarding new appoint-
ments to and promotions within Scientology organizations and activities is set
and is not to be departed from. Omission of one or more of these in the past has
factually cost millions of dollars.

It is expressly forbidden hereafter to propose or post any person to any ex-
ecutive post (Departmental Director or above) without the following:

l.

Actual production stats of the proposed person relating to the subject of
the post he is being proposed for be found, established and verified.

. That investigation reveals an acceptable ethics record.

. Before being posted the person must be checked for any PTSness and

any found must be handled.

The person must be rolled back for any participation in any black PR
activity.

The person must be sec checked for false considerations or evil pur-
poses.

. The person must be false data stripped in relation to the activity he has

been or is about to be engaged upon in the organization.

. In keeping with the policy that any person posted in an executive posi-

tion in a Scientology organization must be able to achieve, maintain and
increase a high level of production and income in his area, the stats
found and verified must prove extreme productiveness on the part of the
proposed person in the area of the post he is being proposed for. This
applies to any executive post. (With the technology and administrative
know-how available in Scientology, any exec should, through production

471
and exchange of high quality products, be capable of generating on the
order of a million dollars a year for his organization.)

The above requirements are quite in addition to requisite executive status and
training certificates held by the person and/or required for the post for which he
is being considered. (Ref: HCO PL 29 Dec. 82R, Rev. 30 July 83, THE TOOLS
OF MANAGEMENT)

APPLICATION FOR ACTING STATUS

Before a candidate for an executive posting may assume more than Temporary
status, a full CSW covering points 1~7 above and prepared by the Personnel Con-
trol Officer must be approved on established executive posting approval lines.
The Estab Exec International is responsible for issuing directives setting these
approval lines, and for updating them as needed.

Approval lines set up are to include approval of all exec postings by an
authorized representative of the Office of Senior C/S Int and an authorized
representative of the Inspector General Network.

On receipt of written approval, the candidate is granted “Acting” status, and
a personnel order to this effect can be issued.

Executive posting CSWs may NOT be allowed to staledate at any point on
the approval line.

Establishment and maintenance of approval lines is the responsibility of the
Senior HAS International.

REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMANENT STATUS

The following additional requirements are established for permanent posting
at the level of Departmental Director or above:

8. No person may be permanently posted in a Scientology organization
without a thorough apprenticeship under competent supervision before
any turnover or permanent posting can occur.

9. No full posting in a Scientology organization can occur until the actual
stats of the person achieved during that apprenticeship period have been
found to be correct and excellent.

10. No person so assigned as an apprentice on a post may draw a bonus until

he is fully Post Purpose Cleared, TIPed, his TIP complete, and he is
fully: hatted.

APPLICATION FOR PERMANENT STATUS
Once the (Acting) exec has successfully fulfilled the requirements listed in
points 8, 9 and 10 above, application is made for Permanent posting. This appli-
cation follows the same routing as for Acting status. The application consists of a
new CSW, with verified evidence of requirements 8-10 above having been met.

Upon receipt of written confirmation of the posting from the Inspector General

472
Network, a personnel order may be issued appointing the executive permanently
to that post.

NETWORKS
This policy applies fully to the posting of executives in any of the various

management networks, including FBOs, D/FBOs for MORE, Flag Reps, LRH
Comms and any other networks.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder

473
HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE
Saint Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex

HCO POLICY LETTER OF 21 JANUARY 1991

Remimeo

Personnel Series 33

MOONRIPPING
Ref:
HCO PL 6 Oct. 70 II Personnel Series 10
“MOONLIGHTING”

‘“Moonripping” is a contraction formed from the words “moonlight” (the act
of working on a job outside an org) and “rip-off” (an act or instance of cheating,
swindling, exploiting or taking advantage of another or others). The term is used
to describe the situation where an org is being used as an employment center so
the executives can hire their staffs to further the execs’ own businesses, etc., with
the result that the staff don’t look to the org for support. Moonripping doesn’t
really have anything to do with moonlighting.

The following are some of the varieties of moonripping. Org staff and exec-
utives should be aware of them, so they can take action to handle such out-ethics
when found:

1. Using the org as an employment agency and hiring people into the org
and getting them somewhat trained and processed to use them in an
outside business.

2. Holding an executive position on staff so that one can run a business
that employs staff.

3. Arranging staff schedules so they can work in a private business.
4. Making people replace themselves in a private business.

5. Concentrating on the outside job to a point where the staff and execu-
tives do not look to the org for support and so don’t care at all what
happens to it.

6. Using the org and its connections but actually working in a mission and
shunting org public to it.

The dividing line between moonlighting and moonripping is the point where
it is done in any way to damage or erode org income or staff involvement in their
own post. An executive doing this is running an org just to get the materials and have
comm lines and has no concern for the organization’s survival and that of its
staff.

474
Moonripping is parasitic on an org. Staff and executives must prevent it
from occurring and concentrate their activities on building a strong, ethical and
prosperous organization.

L. RON HUBBARD
Founder
Compilation assisted by

LRH Technical Research and
Compilations

475
