 
DIANETICS AND SCIENTOLOGY

TECHNICAL DICTIONARY

by

L. Ron Hubbard

Publications Organization
Los Angeles
Published by

Church of Scientology of California
Publications Organization United States
The American Saint Hill Organization
2723 West Temple Street

Los Angeles, California 90026

The Church of Scientology of
California is a non-profit organization.

Scientology is an applied religious philosophy.
Dianetics® and Scientology® are registered names.

First printing 1975

Second printing, November 1975

Copyright © 1949, 1950, 1951, 1952, 1953, 1954,
1955, 1956, 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961, 1962,
1963, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970,
1971, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975 by L. Ron Hubbard.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

The E-meter is not intended or effective for
the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of any
disease.

A Dianetics Publication.
Dianetics is the trademark of L. Ron Hubbard
in respect of his published works.

Compiled and edited by
The LRH Personal Compilations Bureau

Editors: Pat Brice/Alethiea C. Taylor
Project I/C: Ernie Ryan
Compilers: Cliff Von Shura, Rhonda L. Bauer
Researchers: Anita Von Shura, Terry Von Shura,
Barbara Chandler, Arden Hansen,
Bridget Marple, Bill Thomas.
Manuscript Typist: Morton A. Smithberg
Sidecheckers: John Eastment/David Mayo
Artist: Andre Clavel

ISBN 0-88404-037-2
Printed in the U.S.A. by Kingsport Press, Inc.

Typeset by Freedmen’s Organization, Los Angeles, California
Contents

Guide to the Dictionary..........................0 00085 vii
Note ..... bce c cence eee ene e eee eey ene eeeeeenennnas viii
Introduction ........0.0.0.0 00.0000 c cc ccc eee ene ix
The Dianetics and Scientology Dictionary .............. 1
The Tone Seale... 0... ccna 484
The Reference Summary..................-..-- Leeeeeee 487
AbbreviationS........0 0.0.0.0 0c cece eee es 489
Definition Notes ........0. 0000.00 c cece ee nee 492
Books ........ 0... cece cc cee ene eee eee e ees 492
Booklets... 0.2... 0.00 ccc cee ene eens 494
Dianetic Auditor Bulletins ........................00. 495
Articles and Scientology Journals..................... 495
Magazines ...............00 0s cece renee beeen eees 495
Professional Auditor Bulletins........................ 496
Hubbard Communications Office Bulletins ............. 496
Hubbard Communications Office Policy Letters......... 528
Miscellaneous References. .............0. 000.0 e eee 563
LRH Tape Recorded Lectures ............. tee ee 534
About the Author .........0000.0. 0... cc ccc cee eee 565

Church and Mission List ................2... 000. e eee 569
Guide to the Dictionary

This is the long awaited and much heralded Dzanetics and Scien-
tology Technical Dictionary. It contains and defines almost all of the
words and abbreviations used in connection with auditing technology and
with the training of auditors to date in Dianetics and Scientology. Many
words have several definitions taken from various periods of the
development of Dianetics and Scientology.

A large amount of L. Ron Hubbard's books, tape lectures, articles
and technical bulletins etc. were researched for many years by a team
of researchers. The period from 1950 to 1975 was heavily consulted for
the terms and their definitions.

The student can readily see the progressive development through
time of the vocabulary of Dianetics and Scientology by its Source and
Founder, L. Ron Hubbard as well as the changes that have come about
through his continued research. More important however, is the fact that
all of the materials of the subjects remain valid and in force today.

In compiling this dictionary the researchers and editors have chosen
to omit the conventional use of the ellipsis (. . .) which would indicate an
intentional omission of words in the definition. This is so that each
definition imparts a complete uninterrupted thought to the reader and
allows him to form a concept of the word without distraction or the
inclusion of data not contributory to the definztzon.

The references at the end of each definition allow the reader to
consult the Source of the definition if further information is desired.

In addition to giving an understanding of the vocabulary of the
subjects and clearing up misunderstood words and abbreviations in
connection with Dianetics and Scientology, there is a further major use
for this dictionary; The student requiring information about any area of
Dianetics or Scientology need only look up the words connected with that
area and he will be provided with references to appropriate material for
further study of that area.

As the Tone Scale is referred to in many definitions a full Tone’ Scale
appears at the end of the dictionary before the reference summary.

The Editors

vii
Vili

Note

While this dictionary has attempted to include
all Dianetic and Scientology technical words and
philosophic terms, there is a chance you might find
some words not included.

If you discover any missing words, please
write them to:

Dictionary Staff
LRH Personal Secretary
Saint Hill Manor
East Grinstead
Sussex, England

The Editors
Introduction

In the early sixties the research which I did on study and study
materials brought to view the necessity of an accurate and modernized
dictionary of Dianetics and Scientology.

Despite the pressing need of this so many other research projects
existed that I did not have an opportunity to personally engage upon this
work of definitions. All of the grades and OT levels remained to be
researched in full and therefore I relegated any dictionary compilations
to staff action.

Almost all the words used in Dianetics and Scientology are defined in
the early bulletins in which they first appeared. However, a complete
dictionary is a vital necessity and use of it can mean the difference
between understanding and not understanding; being able to be an
auditor and not being one.

Philosophy has always had the liability of gathering to itself a great
many new words and labels. The reason for this is that the philosopher
finds phenomena in the physical universe or in the mind or humanities
which have not hitherto been observed or properly identified. Each one of
these tends to require a new word for its description. In actual fact this
cycle of new observations requiring new labels is probably the growth of
language itself. Language is obviously the product of unsung observers
who then popularized a word to describe what had been observed.

The system which has been followed in Dianetics and Scientology in
labelling phenomena or observed things was originally to make verbs into
nouns or vice versa. The practice of developing new nomenclature was
actually held to a minimum. However, it was found that many old words
in the field of philosophy, when used, conveyed to people an entirely new
idea. The exactness of Dianetics and Scientology required a more precise
approach. This approach was achieved by special naming with an eye to
minimal confusion with already supposed or known phenomena. The
Dianetics and Scientology vocabulary is nevertheless not large.

It is interesting that many Dianetics and Scientology terms have
moved sideways into society and are in common use today.

In the search which brought about Dianetics and Scientology many
new phenomena were encountered which resulted, for the first time, in a

ix
workable, predictable science of the humanities. The introduction of a
few words of new meaning to make this possible seems to be a small price
to pay.

It is the hallmark of the Dianeticist and Scientologist that he uses
these words even in his common conversation with ease and facility.

The student who is not completely conversant with these exact words
as contained in this dictionary will find himself drowsing over his
bulletins and utterly appalled when he tries to obtain results which are
not forthcoming due to his lack of understanding of some small word.

The liability of misunderstood words is not a monopoly of Dianetics
and Scientology. In broader university subjects you will find that not only
the vocabulary of the subject, but the subject itself is often completely
and totally misunderstood, leaving the student ARC broken, upset and
even riotous. .

Whereas the subject of misunderstood words or understood words is,
in itself, a broad one, it does not comprise, in itself, the entire technology
of study.

I hope this dictionary will be of use. Not only in clarifying some of
the phenomena of existence, but also speeding greatly your study of
Dianetics and Scientology and the results you will be able to attain
thereby.
DIANETICS AND SCIENTOLOGY

TECHNICAL DICTIONARY
A

A, affinity. (5904C08)
AA, attempted abortion. (DMSMH, p. 245)

A=A=A, 1. anything equals anything equals anything. This is
the way the reactive mind thinks, irrationally identifying
thoughts, people, objects, experiences, statements, etc., with
one another where little or no similarity actually exists. (Scn
AD) 2. all differences are probably identities and all identities
are different and all similarities are imaginary. We have a broad
dissertation on this in Dianetics: the Modern Science of Mental
Health as it affects insane behavior. Everything is everything
else. Mr. X looks at a horse, knows it’s a house, knows it’s a
school teacher, so when he sees a horse he is respectful. (HCO
PL 26 Apr 70R) 3. this is the behavior of the reactive mind.
Everything is identified with everything on a certain subject.
(PDC 20)

ABCD, 1. these are the steps designation of the second run
through of R3R as given in the commands for R3R. Usually the
auditor simply writes ABCD on his worksheet which shows he
has given the command required and designated under A, under
B, under C, under D, as and when he gives them to the preclear.
(LRH Def. Notes) 2. after the first time through an incident in
Dn and when pc has recounted it, the auditor tells pe, A. “Move
to the beginning of the incident.” B. “Tell me when you are
there.” C. When pc has said he is, “Scan through to the end of
the incident.” D. “Tell me what happened.” (BTB 6 May 69R II)

1
ABERRATE

ABERRATE, to make something diverge from a straight line. The
word comes basically from optics. (Dn 55!, p. 65) —adj.
Aberrated, departed from rationality, deranged. (EOS, p. 14)

ABERRATED BEHAVIOR, destructive effort toward pro-survival
data or entities on any dynamic or effort toward the survival of
contra-survival data or entities for any dynamic. (Sen 0-8, p. 86)
See ABERRATION.

ABERRATED PERSONALITY, the personality resultant from
superimposition, on the genetic personality of personal char-
acteristics and tendencies brought about by all environmental
factors, pro-survival and aberrational. (SOS Gloss)

Aberration (Def. 1)

ABERRATION, 1. a departure from rational thought or behavior.
From the Latin, aberrare, to wander from; Latin, ab, away,
errare, to wander. It means basically to err, to make mistakes,
or more specifically to have fixed ideas which are not true. The
word is also used in its scientific sense. It means departure from
a straight line. If a line should go from A to B, then if it is “aber-
rated” it would go from A to some other point, to some other
point, to some other point, to some other point, to some other
point and finally arrive at B. Taken in its scientific sense, it
would also mean the lack of straightness or to see crookedly as,
in example, a man sees a horse but thinks he sees an elephant.
Aberrated conduct would be wrong conduct, or conduct not
supported by reason. When a person has engrams, these tend to
ABILITY TO THINK

deflect what would be his normal ability to perceive truth and
bring about an aberrated view of situations which then would
cause an aberrated reaction to them. Aberration is opposed to
sanity, which would be its opposite. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. an
aberrated person wanders from his self-determined course. He
no longer goes where he wants to go now, but goes where he
has wanted to go in the past. His course is, therefore, not
rational, and he seems to go wherever the environment pushes
him. He has as many aberrations as he has hidden contra-
survival decisions in his past. (Abi 114A) 3. mental derange-
ment, any irrational condition. (DMSMH, p. 102) 4. the aber-
ree’s reactions to and difficulties with his current environment.
(DTOT, p. 127) 5. the manifestation of an engram, and is serious
only when it influences the competence of the individual in his
environment. (Sen Jour 28-G) 6. the degree of residual plus or
minus randomity accumulated by compelling, inhibiting or
unwarranted assisting of efforts on the part of other organisms
or the physical (material) universe. (Scn 0-8, p. 86)

ABERRATIVE VALENCE, people from whom one felt that one
could not withhold anything were the most aberrative valences
on the case. We thus have a new definition for aberrative
valences, namely the “cannot withhold from” valence. (PAB 128)

ABERREE, 1. a neologism meaning an aberrated person.
(DMSMG, p. 22) 2. a person not released or cleared. (DMSMH,
p. 286) 3. anybody who has one or more engrams. (EOS, p. 90)
4. was sometimes used in the early days of Dn to designate an
aberrated person. (LRH Def. Notes)

ABILITY, to observe, to make decisions, to act. (SH Spee 131,
6204C03)

ABILITY GAIN, the pc's recognition that pe can now do things he
could not do before. (HCOB 28 Feb 59)

ABILITY RELEASE, expanded Grade IV release. (CG&AC 75)
See GRADE IV RELEASE.

ABILITY TO THINK, the capability of the mind to perceive, pose
and resolve specific and general problems. (DASF, p. 90)
ABRIDGED STYLE AUDITING

ABRIDGED STYLE AUDITING, (Level III style), by abridged is
meant “abbreviated,” shorn of extras. Any not actually needful
auditing command is deleted. In this style we have shifted from
pure rote to a sensible use or omission as needful. We still use
repetitive commands expertly, but we don’t use rote that is
unnecessary to the situation. (HCOB 6 Nov 64)

ABSOLUTE OVERT ACT, an absolute overt act would be
something destructive on all eight dynamics. (5901004)

ABSOLUTE RIGHTNESS, the immortality of the individual
himself, his children, his group, mankind and the universe and
all energy—the infinity of complete survival. (DASF, p. 80)

ABSOLUTE WRONGNESS, the extinction of the universe and all
energy and the source of energy—the infinity of complete death.
(DASF, p. 80)

ABSOLUTE ZERO, 1. something that does not have mass,
doesn’t have wave-length, doesn’t have location and does not
have time. (UPC 11) 2. absolute zero would be a no-motion, a
no-temperature condition. (SH Spec 96, 6112C21)

AC, Ability Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
ACAD, Academy. (BPL 5 Nov 72R)

ACADEMY, in Scn the academy is that department of the
technical division in which courses and training are delivered;
Department 11, Division 4. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) Abbr. Acad.

ACC, Advanced Clinical Course. (PAB 71)

ACCELERATION PROCESS, this was an experimental rundown
run in 1970-1971. It consisted of running down prior ARC breaks
preceding engrams; it was superseded by L-10 and Expanded
Dianetics. Mentioned in HCOB 21 Dec 69, Solo Auditing and
R6EW. (LRH Def. Notes)

ACCEPTABLE EFFECT, one which is real. The person is certain
that an effect of some kind or other has occurred. (5707C25)

ACCEPTANCE LEVEL, 1. the degree of a person’s actual
willingness to accept people or things, monitored and deter-
mined by his consideration of the state or condition that those
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

people or things must be in for him to be able to do so. (PXL
Gloss) 2. what he really could have. (XDN No. 4, 7204C07)

ACCEPTANCE LEVEL PROCESSING, that process which dis-
covers the lowest level of acceptance of the individual and
discovers there the prevailing hunger and feeds that hunger by
means of mock-ups until it is satiated. The process is not a
separate process itself, but is actually a version of Expanded
Gita. (PAB 15)

ACCESSIBILITY, 1. the willingness of the preclear to accept
auditing and the ability of the auditor and the preclear to work
as a team to increase the position of the preclear on the tone
scale. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 187) 2. the accessibility of an individual
has to do with his own ability to communicate with his
environment and to communicate with his own past. (5011C22)
3. generally, the desire of the individual to attain new and
higher levels of survival and the betterment of mind and body.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 185)

ACCIDENT-PRONE, a case where the reactive mind commands
accidents. He is a serious menace in any society for his accidents
are reactively intentional and they include the destruction of
other people who are innocent. (DMSMH, p. 153)

ACC TRs, TRs which have been used on the Ist South African
ACC and are a version of the E-meter drills. (HCOB 30 Apr 60)

ACK, acknowledgement. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
ACK’ED, acknowledged. (BCR, p. 23)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT, something said or done to inform
another that his statement or action has been noted, understood
and received. “Very good,” “Okay,” and other such phrases are
intended to inform another who has spoken or acted that his
statement or action has been accepted. An acknowledgement
also tends to confirm that the statement has been made or the
action has been done and so brings about a condition not only of
communication but of reality between two or more people.
Applause at a theater is an acknowledgement of the actor or act
plus approval. Acknowledgement itself does not necessarily
imply an approval or disapproval or any other thing beyond the

5
ACT

knowledge that an action or statement has been observed and is
received. In signaling with the morse code the receiver of a
message transmits an R to the sender as a signal that the
message has been received, which is to say acknowledged.
There is such a thing as over-acknowledgement and there is
such a thing as under-acknowledgement. A correct and exact
acknowledgement communicates to someone who has spoken
that what he has said has been heard. An acknowledgement
tends to terminate or end the cycle of a communication, and
when expertly used can sometimes stop a continued statement
or continued action. An acknowledgement is also part of the
communication formula and is one of its steps. The Scientologist,
sometimes, in using Scientologese abbreviates this to “Ack”; he
“acked” the person. (LRH Def. Notes)

ACT, a stage of processing. Applies solely to the particular
process in use at a certain case level. (AP&A Gloss)

Action (Def. 4)
ACTION PHRASES

ACTION, 1. a motion through space having a certain speed. (SH
Spec 42, 6410C13) 2. action=motion or movement=an act=a
consideration that motion has occurred. (FOT, p. 19) 3. doing-
ness directed towards havingness. (Scn 8-8008, p. 26) 4. action
consists of energy outputs and inputs. Action is energy inter-
changes on a gross mest level. (5203CM05A)

Action Cycle

ACTION CYCLE, the creation, growth, conservation, decay and
death or destruction of energy and matter in a space. Action
cycles produce time; an action cycle goes from 40.0 to 0.0 on the
tone scale. (Sen 0-8, p. 25)

ACTION DEFINITION, see DEFINITIONS, TYPES OF.

ACTION PHRASES, 1. words or phrases in engrams or locks (or
at 0.1 in present time) which cause the individual to perform
involuntary actions on the time track. Action phrases are
effective in the low tone ranges and not effective in the high
ranges. As a case progresses up the scale, they lose their power.
Types of action phrases are bouncer, down bouncer, grouper,
denyer, holder, misdirector, scrambler, and the valence shifters
corresponding to these. (SOS Gloss) 2. those which seem to
order the preclear in various directions. The action phrases are
bouncers such as, “Get up,” “Get out”; holders such as “Stay

7
ACTUAL

here,” “Don’t move”; misdirectors such as “Don’t know whether
I'm coming or going,” or “Everything is backwards”; down-
bouncers such as “Get under,” or “Go back”; groupers such as
“Everything happens at once,” “Pull yourself together”; call-
backs such as “Come back,” “Please come”; and one other, the
denyer, which states that the engram does not exist, such as
“There isn’t anything here,” “I can’t see anything.” There is also
the valence shifter which shifts the individual from his own
identity to the identity of another; the valence-bouncer, which
prohibits an individual from going into some particular valence;
the valence denyer, which may even deny that the person's own
valence exists; and the valence-grouper, which makes all va-
lences into one valence. These are all the types of action
phrases. (SOS, pp. 181-182)

ACTUAL, that which is really true; that which exists despite all
apparencies; that which underlies the way things seem to be;
the way things really are. (FOT, p. 20)

ACTUAL CYCLE OF ACTION, CREATE, create-create-create,
create-counter-create, no creation, nothingness. CREATE=
make, manufacture, construct, postulate, bring into beingness=
CREATE. Create-create-create=create again continuously one
moment after the next=SURVIVAL. Create-counter-create=to
create something against a creation=to create one thing and
then create something else against it=DESTROY. No creation
=an absence of any creation=no creative activity. An ACTUAL
cycle of action then consists of various activities, but each and
every one of them is creative. The cycle of action contains an
APPARENCY of SURVIVAL, but this is actually only a
continuous creation. (FOT, pp. 20-21)

ACTUAL GOAL, the dominating significance of the thetan’s own
causation which binds together the masses accumulated by the

~ reliable items of an actual GPM. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen VI Part
One Glossary of Terms)

ACTUAL GPM, the composite black mass of all the pairs of
reliable items and their associated locks, dominated and bound
together by the significance of an actual goal and having a
definite location as a mass on the time track. (HCOB 13 Apr 64,
Sen VI Part One Glossary of Terms)
ADMINISTRATION (ADMIN)

ACTUALITY, (Scientology Axiom 27), an actuality can exist for
one individually, but when it is agreed with by others it can then
be said to be a reality. (PXL, p. 175) 2. one’s attitude towards
his own universe. (Sen 8-8008, p. 28)

ACUTE, immediate, right now. It doesn’t mean exaggerated.
Medically it means simply right now, and rather temporary. (SH
Spec 31, 6401028)

ACUTE INSANITY, one which flares into existence for a few
moments or a few days and then subsides, leaving a relatively
normal person. (DASF, p. 77)

AD or A.D., after Dianetics (1950) e.g. 1965=AD 15. (HCOB 23
Aug 65)

ADAPTIVE POSTULATE, a pre-Dianetic error that an individual
was healthy so long as he was adjusted to his environment.
Nothing could be less workable than this “adaptive” postulate.
Man succeeds because he adjusts his environment to him, not
by adjusting himself to the environment. (SA, p. 112)

AD COURSES, see ADVANCED COURSES.

ADDITIVE, a thing which has been added. This usually has a bad
meaning in that an additive is said to be something needless or
harmful which has been done in addition to standard procedure.
Additive normally means a departure from standard procedure.
For example, an auditor puts different or additional words into a
standard process or command. It means a twist on standard
procedure. In common English, it might mean a substance put
into a compound to improve its qualities or suppress undesirable
qualities. In Dn and Sen it definitely means to add something to
the technology procedure resulting in undesirable results. (LRH
Def. Notes)

ADMIN, administration or administrator. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

ADMINISTRATION (ADMIN), a contraction or shortening of the
word administration, admin is used as a noun to denote the
actions involved in administering an organization. The clerical
and executive decisions, actions and duties necessary to the
running of an organization, such as originating and answering
mail, typing, filing, dispatching, applying policy and all those
actions, large and small which make up an organization. Admin

9
ADMIN TRs

is also used to denote the action or fact of keeping auditor’s
reports, summary reports, worksheets and other records
related to an auditing session. “He kept good admin,” meaning
that his summary report, auditor’s report and worksheets were
neat, exactly on pattern, in proper sequence and easily under-
stood as well as complete. “His admin was bad”; from the
scribble and disorderly keeping of records of the session while it
was in progress one could not make out what had happened in
the session. You will also see the word admin in connection with
the three musts of a well-run organization. It is said that its
ethics, tech and admin must be “in,” which mean they must be
properly done, orderly and effective. The word derives from
minister, which means to serve. Administer means to manage,
govern, to apply or direct the application of laws, or discipline,
to conduct or execute religious offices, dispense rights. It comes
from the Latin, administrare, to manage, carry out, accomplish,
to attend, wait, serve. In modern English, when they use
administration they mean management or running a government
or the group that is in charge of the organization or the state.
(LRH Def. Notes)

ADMIN TRs, the purpose of these TRs is to train the student to
get compliance with and complete a cycle of action on admin-
istrative actions and orders, in spite of the randomities, confu-
sions, justifications, excuses, traps and insanities of the third
and sixth dynamics, and to confront such comfortably while
doing so. (BTB 7 Feb 71)

ADMIRATION, 1. is the very substance of a communication line,
and it is that thing which is considered desirable in the game of
the three universes. (COHA,. p. 203) 2. a particle which unites
and resolves, like the universal solvent, all types of energy,
particularly force. (PAB 8)

ADVANCED CLINICAL COURSE, 1. basically a theory and
research course which gives a much further insight into the phe-
nomena of the mind and the rationale of research and investiga-
tion. (PAB 71) 2. L. Roh Hubbard's special courses personally
taught by him, scheduled by him, and sponsored for him by an
HCO office. (HCO PL 24 Feb 60) Abbr. ACC.

10
AFFINITY

ADVANCED COURSES, 1. Solo Audit Course, Clearing Course
or OT courses. (HCO PL 12 Aug 71 II) 2. above VA processes,
one enters the field of advanced courses, specifically dealing
with materials of which one has to solo audit in order to attain
the stable gains of the grade. (HCO PL 28 Mar 70) Abbr. Ad
Crses.

ADVANCED ORGANIZATION, 1. the advanced courses were at
first separate in the Office of LRH at Saint Hill and then became
the Advanced Orgs (AOs) under the Sea Org. (HCOB 8 Oct 71
II) 2. that organization which runs the advanced courses. Its
products are Clears and OTs. (FO 508)

ADVANCE PROGRAM, 1. the major actions to be undertaken to
get the case back on the class chart from wherever he had
erroneously gotten to on it. The advance program consists of
writing down in sequence every needful step and process missed
on the class chart by the case which is now to be done. It gets
the preclear or pre-OT up to where he should be. (HCOB 14 Jun
70) 2. this is what was called a “return program” in the C/S
Series. The name was changed from “return” to “advance” as
more appropriate. (HCOB 25 Jun 70 II)

A.E.S.P., attitudes, emotions, sensations, pains. (BTB 8 Jan 71R)

AESTHETIC MIND, that mind which, by an interplay of the
dynamics, deals with the nebulous field of art and creation.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 234)

AESTHETIC PRODUCT, 1. Dn Axiom 169: any aesthetic product
is a symbolic facsimile or combination of facsimiles of theta or
physical universes in varied randomities and volumes of random-
ities with the interplay of tones. (AP&A, p. 99)

AESTHETICS, the study of ideal form and beauty—it is the
philosophy of art, which itself is the quality of communication.
(B&C, p. 15)

AFFINITY, 1. the feeling of love ‘or liking for something or
someone. Affinity is a phenomena of space in that it expresses
the willingness to occupy the same place as the tHing which is

11
AFFINITY

12

Affinity (Def. 1)

loved or liked. The reverse of it would be antipathy, “dislike” or
rejection which would be the unwillingness to occupy the same
space as or the unwillingness to approach something or some-
one. It came from the French, affinite, affinity, kindred,
alliance, nearness and also from the Latin, affinis, meaning near,
bordering upon. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. the ability to occupy the
space of, or be like or similar to, or to express a willingness to
be something. (SH Spec 83, 6612C06) 3. the relative distance
and similarity of the two ends of a communication line. (Dn 554,
p. 35) 4. emotional response; the feeling of affection or the lack
of it, of emotion or misemotion connected with life. (HCOB 21
Jun 71 I) 5. the attraction which exists between two human
beings or between a human being and another life organism or
between a human being and mest or theta or the Supreme
Being. It has a rough parallel in the physical universe in
magnetic and gravitic attraction. The affinity or lack of affinity
between an organism and the environment or between the theta
and mest of an organism and within the theta (including entheta)
of the organism brings about what we have referred to as
emotions. (SOS Gloss) 6, in its truest definition which is
coincidence of location and beingness, that is the ultimate in
affinity. (9ACC-10, 5412CM20)
ALLY

AFFINITY SCALE, 1. a scale which refers to the individual’s
relation with other people. The affinity scale may refer, at any
particular time, to just one or to a small number of people. But
as affinity is suppressed repeatedly, the individual will begin to
take on an habitual tone level, on the affinity scale, an habitual
reaction to almost all people. (NOTL, p. 102) 2. the affinity scale
includes most of the common emotions, apathy, grief, fear,
anger, hostility, boredom, relief, contentment, enthusiasm,
exhilaration, inspiration. (SOS Gloss)

AGAINST SCIENTOLOGY, attention off Scientology and pro-
testing Scientology behavior. (HCOB 19 Aug 63)

AGAINST SESSION, attention off own case and talking at the
auditor in protest of auditor, PT auditing environment or Scn.
(HCOB 19 Aug 63) See also OUT OF SESSION.

AGE FLASH, the auditor says, “When I snap my fingers an age
will occur to you. Give me the first number that comes into your
mind.” He then snaps his fingers, and the preclear gives him the
first number which comes into his head. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 51)

AGONY, is the deep emotion of boredom. Boredom, in essence, is
the warning signal that agony is on its way. (5312CM20)

AGREEMENT, 1. a mutual knowingness, a mutual postulating-
ness towards certain end products. (SH Spec 71, 6110025) 2.
two or more people making the same postulates stick. (SH Spec
62, 6110004) 3. ability to co-act with or mimic or be mimicked
by. (5303M24) 4. a specialized consideration, it is shared in
common, and this we call an agreement. (5702C26)

AHMC, Anatomy of the Human Mind Course. (CG&AC 75)

AICL, Advanced Indoctrination Course Lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept
66)

ALL THE WAY SOUTH, Slang. that state of mind at the extreme
bottom where the fellow must have total effect on self and could
not possibly make any effect of any kind on anybody else. It’s
below death. (5707C25)

ALLY, 1. this is a noun which means an individual who cooperates
with, supports and helps another for a common object; a

13
ALLY COMPUTATION

supporter, a friend. In Dn and Sen, it basically means someone
who protects a person who is in a weak state and becomes a
very strong influence over the person. The weaker person, such
as a child, even partakes the characteristics of the ally so that
one may find that a person who has, for instance, a bad leg, has
it because a protector or ally in his youth had a bad leg. The
word is from French and Latin and means to bind together.
(LRH Def. Notes) 2. by ally in Sen, we mean a person from
whom sympathy came when the preclear was ill or injured. If
the ally came to the preclear’s defense or his words and/or
actions were aligned with the individual’s survival, the reactive
mind gives that ally the status of always being right—especially
if this ally was obtained during a highly painful engram. (HCOB
20 Mar 70)

ALLY COMPUTATION, little more than a mere idiot calculation
that anyone who is a friend can be kept a friend only by
approximating the conditions wherein the friendship was real-
ized. It is a computation on the basis that one can only be safe in
the vicinity of certain people and that one can only be in‘the
vicinity of certain people by being sick or crazy or poor and
generally disabled. (DMSMH, p. 243)

ALTER-IS, 1. a composite word meaning the action of altering or
changing the reality of something. Is-ness means the way it is.
When someone sees it differently he is doing an alter-is; in other
words, is altering the way it is. This is taken from the Axioms.
(LRH Def. Notes) 2. to introduce a change and therefore time
and persistence in an as-is-ness to obtain persistency. An
introduction of an alter-is is therefore the addition of a lie to the
real which causes it to persist and not to blow or as-is. (HCOB
11 May 65)

ALTER-IS-NESS, 1. the consideration which introduces change,
and therefore time and persistence into an as-is-ness to obtain
persistency. (PXL, p. 154) 2. the effort to preserve something
by altering its characteristics. (PXZ, p. 53)

ALTER-IST, the control case, the person obsessively controlling
things, and himself, is an alter-ist. He’s got to change, change.
Well, he’s lost too much. Now he’s got to change everything but
he’s not satisfied with anything. (PXL, p. 54)

14
ANALYTICAL MIND

ALTERNATE, 1. occurring by turns; succeeding each other; one
and then the other. (HCOB 10 May 65) 2. in auditing, alternate
means two questions run one after the other, consecutively, one
command positive followed by one negative. (HCOB 4 Dec 59)

ALTERNATE CONFRONT, (PROCESS), “What can you con-
front?” “What would you rather not confront?” (HCOB 16 Jun
60)

ALTITUDE, 1. a prestige which the auditor has in the eyes of the
preclear. A somewhat artificial position of the auditor which
gives the preclear greater confidence and therefore greater
ability to run than he would otherwise have. (SOS Gloss) 2. a
difference of level of prestige—one in a higher altitude carries
conviction to one on a lower altitude merely because of altitude.
(DMSMH, p. 343)

AMNESIA, a guy who is so spooked that he doesn't dare
remember ten seconds ago. He has had some experience earlier
than which he is not going to remember, including the expe-
rience, so he’s only willing to remember some moment after that
experience. (SH Spec 72, 6607C28)

ANALYTICAL, capable of resolving, such as problems, situa-
tions. The word analytical is from the Greek andlysis meaning
resolve, undo, loosen, which is to say take something to pieces
to see what it is made of. This is one of those examples of the
shortcomings of the English language since no dictionary gives
the word analytical any connection with thinking, reasoning,
perceiving, which in essence is what it would have to mean,
even in English. (LRH Def. Notes)

ANALYTICAL ATTENUATION, see ANATEN.

ANALYTICAL MIND, 1. the conscious aware mind which thinks,
observes data, remembers it, and resolves problems. It would
be essentially the conscious mind as opposed to the unconscious
mind. In Dn and Scn the analytical mind is the one which is alert
and aware and the reactive mind simply reacts without analysis.
(LRH Def. Notes) 2. that mind which combines perceptions of
the immediate environment, of the past (via pictures) and
estimations of the future into conclusions which are based upon

15
ANALYTICAL THOUGHT

the realities of situations. The analytical mind combines the
potential knowingness of the thetan with the conditions of his
surroundings and brings him to independent conclusions. This
mind could be said to consist of visual pictures either of the past
or the physical universe, monitored by, and presided over, by
the knowingness of a thetan. The keynote of the analytical mind
is awareness, one knows what one is concluding and knows what
he is doing. (FOT, pp. 57-58) 3. the awareness of awareness unit
plus some evaluative circuit or circuits, or machinery to make
the handling of the body possible. (Dn 55, pp. 11-12) 4. that part
of the being which perceives, when the individual is awake or in
normal sleep (for sleep is not unconsciousness, and anything the
individual has perceived while he was asleep is recorded in the
standard memory banks and is relatively easy for the auditor to
recover). (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 230) 5. we say the analytical mind is
kind of a misnomer because most people think it’s some kind of
computing machine, and it’s not, it’s just the pc, the thetan. (SH
Spee 23, 6106C29)

ANALYTICAL THOUGHT, 1. thought which directly observes
and analyzes what it observes in terms of observations which
are immediately present. (COHA, p. 196) 2. rational thought as
modified by education and viewpoint. (DMSMH, p. 79)

ANALYZER, the analytical mind. (DMSMH, p. 44)

ANATEN, 1. an abbreviation of analytical attenuation meaning
diminution or weakening of the analytical awareness of ‘an
individual for a brief or extensive period of time. If sufficiently
great, it can result in unconsciousness. (It stems from the
restimulation of an engram which contains pain and unconscious-
ness.) (Sez AD) 2. simply a drop in ARC to an extreme. (PAB
70) 3. the physiological by-product of unconsciousness. (SOS,
Bk. 2, p. 170) 4. dope-off. (Abid 52)

ANATOMY OF THE HUMAN MIND COURSE, a basic Sen
course which teaches observation and understanding of the
fundamentals of the human mind. It includes demonstrations of
the parts of the human mind. There are no prerequisites for this
course. (CG&AC 75) Abbr. AHMC.

ANCHOR POINTS, 1. assigned or agreed-upon points of bound-
ary, which are conceived to be motionless by the individual.

16
ANSWER HUNGER

(PDC 13) 2. points which are anchored in a space different to the
physical universe space around a body. (FOT, p. 63) 3. those
places which we called in Advanced Procedures and Axioms the
sub-brains of the body; control centers, epicenters. (5410C10D)
4. the points which mark an area of space are called anchor
points, and these, with the viewpoint, alone are responsible for
space. (Sen Jour, Iss 14-G) 5. a specialized kind of dimension
point. (Sen 8-8008, p. 16) 6. any kind of a point, any kind of a
particle, any kind of electron, or anything which anybody
believes is an actual point. There is nothing more real than a
real anchor point. (2ACC-1A 5311CM17)

—

Anchor Points (Def. 4) Anger (Def. 1)

ANGER, 1. true anger is a hate hold. At exactly 1.5 on the tone
scale we have a total ridge. It’s hate. When we move a little
above or a little below 1.5 we get a dispersal. (5904C08) 2. anger
is simply the process of trying to hold everything still.
(5203CM09A)

ANSWER HUNGER, an unfinished cycle of communication gener-
ates what might be called answer hunger. An individual who is
waiting for a signal that his communication has been received is
prone to accept any inflow. When an individual has, for a very
long period of time, consistently waited for answers which did
not arrive, any sort of answer from anywhere will be pulled in to
him, by him, as an effort to remedy his scarcity of answers. (Dn
55!, p. 66)

17
ANTAGONISM

Antagonism

ANTAGONISM, at the level of tone 2.0, affinity is expressed as
antagonism, a feeling of annoyance and irritation caused by the
advances of other people toward the individual. (SOS, p. 56)

ANTI Q AND A TR, 1. commands: basically “Put that (object) on
my knee.” Student is to get the coach to place the object that he
has in his hand on the knee of the student. Purpose: (a) to train
student in getting a pe to carry out a command using formal
communication NOT tone 40. (b) to enable the student to
maintain his TRs while giving commands. (c) to train the
student to not get upset with a pe under formal auditing. (HCOB
20 Nov 78 I) 2. to get this disease (Q&A) out of an HGC requires
that auditors go through an anti Q and A handling. (HCOB 20
Nov 73 II)

ANTISOCIAL PERSONALITY, 1. there are certain character-
istics and mental attitudes which cause about 20 per cent of a
race to oppose violently any betterment activity or group. Such
people are known to have antisocial tendencies. (ISE, p. 9) 2.
we're calling it a suppressive because it’s more explicit. (SH
Spec 78, 6608C25) See also SUPPRESSIVE PERSON.

ANXIETY, constant irresolute computation. Constant computa-
tion on a certain point or a certain problem. That is what worry
is and that is what anxiety is. (T-80-2A 5205C20)

18
APPARENCY

AO, Advanced Org. (HCOB 8 Oct 71 II)
AP, aberrated personality. (DMSMH, p. 124)

APA, American Personality Analysis, the personality test. (BTB 3
Nov 72R) See OCA.

APATHY, 1. complete withdrawal from person or people. There
is in apathy no real attempt to contact one’s self and no attempt
to contact others. Here we have a null point of dissonance which
is on the threshold of death. (SOS, p. 57) 2. a very docile and
obedient, if sick, state of not-beingness. (HFP, p. 56) 3. no
effort, all counter-effort. (AP&A, p. 33) 4. apathy actually is a
motionless enturbulence. It’s an enturbulence cancelling itself
out to the degree that it appears to be motionless. (5206CM25A)
5. apathy, near death, imitates death. If a person is almost all
wrong, he approximates death. He says, “What’s the use? All is
lost.” (NOTL, p. 20)

AN

Apathy (Def, 2, 5)

W

APPARENCY, 1. noun, something that seems to be, that appears
to be a certain way; something appears to be but is different
from the way it looks. It is from the Latin, apparere, to appear.
In Dianetics and Scientology it is used to mean something that
looks one way but is, in actual fact, something else. “Gives an
apparency of health” whereas it’s actually sick. (LRH Def.
Notes) 2. what appears to be as distinct from what actually is.
(FOT, p. 19)

19
APPARENT CYCLE OF ACTION

APPARENT CYCLE OF ACTION, create, then survive, then
destroy; or creation, survival, destruction. (FOT, p. 18)

APPETITE OVER TIN CUP, Slang. a pioneer Western U.S. term
used by riverboat men on the Missouri; it means thrown away
violently, like “head over heels,” “bowled over.” (LRH Def.
Notes)

APPLIED PHILOSOPHY, one which has to do with doing and
action. One which applies to living—not just a theory, but one
where the theory can be used to help you get on better in life.
(BTB 4 Mar 65R)

APPRENTICE SCIENTOLOGIST, one who knows how to know,
how to study, what life is about. (BCR, p. 14)

ARBITRARY, 1. something which is introduced into the situation
without regard to the data of the situation. (SH Spec 83,
6612C06) 2. an order or command introduced into the group in
an effort to lay aside certain harm which may befall the group or
in an effort to get through a period, fancied or real, of
foreshortened time. (NOTL, p. 136) 3. an order or command
which was issued without explanation, and demanded instanta-
neous action on the part of other members of the group. (NOTL,
p. 181)

ARC, Anti-Radiation Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

ARC, 1. a word from the initial letters of Affinity, Reality,
Communication which together equate to Understanding. It is
pronounced by stating its letters, A-R-C. To Scientologists it
has come to mean good feeling, love or friendliness, such as “He
was in ARC with his friend.” One does not, however, fall out of
ARC, he has an ARC break. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. ARC=Under-
standing and Time. A=Space and the willingness to occupy the
same space of. R=Mass or agreement. C=Energy or Recogni-
tion. (HCOB 27 Sept 68 II) 3. affinity is a type of energy and can
be produced at will. Reality is agreement; too much agreement
under duress brings about the banishment of one’s entire
consciousness. Communication, however, is far more important
than affinity or reality, for it is the operation, the action
by which one experiences emotion and by which one agrees.

20
ARC BREAK NEEDLE

(PAB 1) 4. the triagonal manifestation of theta each aspect
affecting the other two. (SOS Gloss)

ARC BREAK, 1. a sudden drop or cutting of one’s affinity,
reality, or communication with someone or something. Upsets
with people or things come about because of a lessening or
sundering of affinity, reality, or communication or under-
standing. It’s called an ARC break instead of an upset, because,
if one discovers which of the three points of understanding have
been cut, one can bring about a rapid recovery in the person’s
state of mind. It is pronounced by its letters A-R-C break. When
an ARC break is permitted to continue over too long a period of
time and remains in restimulation, a person goes into a “sad
effect” which is to say they become sad and mournful, usually
without knowing what is causing it. This condition is handled by
finding the earliest ARC break on the chain, finding whether it
was a break in affinity, reality, communication, or under-
standing and indicating it to the person, always, of course, in
session. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. an incomplete cycle of some kind or
another. It’s a lowering of Affinity, Reality and Communication,
so we call it an ARC break. It’s a sudden down curve. It’s a
highly technical term. It means exactly what it says but its
incept and so forth is an incompete cycle of action. (SH Spec 65,
6507C27) Abbr. ARCX.

ARC BREAK ASSESSMENT, 1. reading an ARC break list
appropriate to the activity to the pe on a meter and doing
nothing but locating and then indicating the charges found by
telling the pe what registered on the needle. (HCOB 7 Sept 64
II) 2. it isn’t auditing because it doesn’t use the auditing comm
cycle. You don’t ack what the pc says, you don’t ask the pe what
it is. You don’t comm. You assess the list between you and the
meter, same as no pe there. Then you find what reads and you
tell the pe. And that’s all. (HCOB 7 Sept 64 II)

ARC BREAK LONG DURATION, spotted by a person who has
led a sad or subdued or rather suppressed sort of life and is
probably around .8 on down on the tone scale. (LRH Def. Notes)

ARC BREAK NEEDLE, 1. a “floating needle” occurring above 3.0
or below 2.0 on a calibrated Mark V E-meter with the pe on two

21
ARC BREAK STRAIGHTWIRE

cans. An ARC break needle can occur between 2.0 and 3.0
where bad indicators are apparent. (HCOB 21 Oct 68) 2. An F/N
with bad indicators is an ARC break needle. These include
propitiation. It is quite usual that a pe has just mentioned grief
when the ARC break needle turns on, or some gloomy idea. A
real F/N means the pc is out the top; an ARC break needle
means he’s out the bottom. He ceases to mock up, through grief.
(HCOB 5 Oct 68) 3. may be dirty, stuck or sticky, but may also
give the appearance of floating. The pe will be upset and out of
comm at the same time. (HCOB 21 Sept 66)

ARC BREAK STRAIGHTWIRE, “Recall an ARC _ break.”
“When?” (HCOB 3 Feb 59)

ARC BROKEN PCs, they gloom and misemote. They criticize and
snarl. Sometimes they scream. They blow, they refuse auditing.
If an auditor’s pe isn’t bright and happy, there’s an ARC break
there with life or the bank or the session. (HCOB 29 Mar 65)

ARC ENGRAM, see SECONDARY ENGRAM. (NOTL, p. 35)

ARC LOCKS, 1. a type of lock which results when affinity,
communication, or reality is forced upon the individual by the
environment when he does not want it, when it is not rationally
necessary, or when one or more of these is inhibited or denied to
the individual by others in the environment. (SOS, p. 113) 2.
“permanent” encystments of entheta resulting from the entur-
bulation of theta by enforcements or inhibitions of affinity,
reality or communication and the trapping of this enturbulated
theta by the physical pain of some engram or chain of engrams
whose perceptics are approximately in the present-time entur-
bulation. Locks are analytical experiences. (SOS Gloss)

ARC SECONDARIES, ARC locks of such magnitude that they
must be run as engrams in processing. Or, since locks are often
run as engrams, ARC locks of great magnitude. (SOS Gloss)

ARC STRAIGHTWIRE, see STRAIGHTWIRE.

ARC STRAIGHTWIRE RELEASE, recall release. Freedom from
deterioration; has hope; knows he/she won't get any worse.
(Sen 0-8, p. 137)

22
ASHO

ARC TRIANGLE, 1. it is called a triangle because it has three
related points: affinity, reality and the most important, com-
munication. Without affinity there is no reality or communica-
tion. Without reality or some agreement, affinity and communi-
cation are absent. Without communication, there can be no
affinity or reality. It is only necessary to improve one corner of
this very valuable triangle in Sen in order to improve the
remaining two corners. The easiest corner to improve is
communication: improving one’s ability to communicate raises at
the same time his affinity for others and life, as well as expands
the scope of his agreements. (Scn AD) 2. this triangle is a
symbol of the fact that affinity, reality, and communication act
together as a whole entity and that one of them cannot be
considered unless the other two are also taken into account.
(NOTE, p. 20)

ARC Triangle

A R

ARCU, Affinity, Reality, Communication, Understanding. (HCOB
6 Aug 68)

ARF, see AUDITOR REPORT FORM.

ART, a word which summarizes the quality of communication. It
therefore follows the laws of communication. Too much origi-
nality throws the audience into unfamiliarity and therefore
disagreement, as communication contains duplication and “origi-
nality” is the foe of duplication. Technique should not rise above
the level of workability for the purpose of communication.
Perfection cannot be attained at the expense of communication.
(HCOB 30 Aug 65)

ASHO, American Saint Hill Organization. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

23
AS-IS

AS-IS, to view anything exactly as it is without any distortions or
lies, at which moment it will vanish and cease to exist. (Sen AD)

AS-IS-NESS, 1. the condition of immediate creation without
persistence, and is the condition of existence which exists at the
moment of creation and the moment of destruction and is
different from other considerations in that it does not contain
survival. (PXL, p. 154) 2. as-is-ness would be the condition
created again in the same time, in the same space, with the
same energy and the same mass, the same motion and the same
time continuum. (PXZ, p. 68) 3. something that is just postu-
lated or just being duplicated—no alteration taking place.
As-is-ness contains no life continuum, no time continuum. (PXL,
p. 91)

ASMC, Anatomy of the Spirit of Man Congress. (HCOB 29
Sept 66)

ASSERTED, another name for suggested, used mainly in check
out of a goal to be sure, and occasionally in routine nulling when
pe is declaring “it is my goal.” (HCOB 1 Aug 62)

ASSESS IN DIANETICS, means choose, from a list or statements
which item or thing has the longest read or the pc’s interest.
The longest read will also have the pe’s interest oddly enough.
(HCOB 23 Apr 69)

ASSESSING BY ELIMINATION, 1. doing it twice because of a
possible instant read fault. Assessing by elimination is done on
double (2 item) reads. But a hot auditor does it on best largest
instant read. (BTB 11 Apr 74) 2. after the first assessment the
auditor continues to assess the reading items on the list by
elimination down to ONE item. Sometimes some items will read
three or four times, but the action is the same. The auditor
assesses the reading items by elimination down to one item.
(BTB 20 Aug 70R) [N.B. This action is revised by HCOB 14 Mar
1971R, F/N Everything and HCOB 20 Apr 72 Iss.II, C/S Series
%8 Product, Purpose and Why and WC Error Correction. }

ASSESSING, METHODS OF, 1. the auditor starts at the top and
takes up each read until he gets one to F/N. In this case the
auditor does not do “Itsa earlier itsa.” He just cleans each read.

24
ASSESSMENT BY INSTANT READ

(HCOB 28 May 70, Correction Lists, Use Of) 2. the auditor
starts from the top and on each read cleans it and does itsa
earlier itsa to F/N or to a clean no-read and goes on. (HCOB 28
May 70, Correction Lists, Use Of) [N.B. the actions described in
1 and 2 above are revised according to HCOB 14 Mar 1971R,
FYN Everything.| 3. method 3— you take a prepared list and you
read it to the pe, and you read the next one to the pc, and the
first one that reads you then take it down earlier similar, earlier
similar, earlier similar, earlier similar, until it F/Ns. (7106C12)
4. the whole list is rapidly assessed over and over until one item
stays in and that is given to the pe. (HCOB 28 May 70,
Correction Lists, Use Of) [N.B. this action in 4 above is revised
according to HCOB 14 Mar 1971R, F/N Everything.) 5. method
5—all the way through and then you sort out the reads
accordingly, and get them into a sequence that will F/N.
(7106C12) 6. method 6—the L-10 method of assessing a prepared
list. You look at the pe and ask him directly every question on
the list. (7106C12)

ASSESSMENT, an inventory and evaluation of a preclear, his
body and his case to establish processing level and procedure.
(HCOB 3 Jul 59, General Information )

ASSESSMENT, 1. is an action done from a prepared list. There is
no other word that goes with that. Assessment does not go with
anything else but that. That is all that assessment means. It is
associated with a prepared list. Only a prepared list. (Class VIII
No. 11) 2. assessment isn’t auditing, it is simply trying to locate
something to audit. You say the word right to the pe’s bank.
(Class VIII No. 11) 3. assessment is done by the auditor between
the pe’s bank and the meter. There is no need in assessing to
look at the pe. Just note which item has the longest fall or BD.
The auditor looks at the meter while doing an assessment.
(HCOB 21 May 69) 4. the whole action of obtaining a significant
item from a pe. (HCOB 5 Dec 62) 5. any method of discovering a
level on the pre-hav scale for a given pe. (HCOB 7 Nov 62 III)

ASSESSMENT BY INSTANT READ, E-meter drill 24. Purpose:
to train the student auditor to assess a list accurately and
rapidly by instant read. (EMD, p. 47)

25
ASSESSMENT BY TONE ARM

ASSESSMENT BY TONE ARM, E-meter drill 23. Purpose: to
train the student auditor to assess a list accurately by selecting
that item which, upon brief discussion, produces the most
movement of the tone arm. (EMD, p. 46)

ASSESSMENT FOR LONGEST READ, calling off the items the
pe has given and marking down the reads that occur on the
meter. The pc is not required to comment during this action and
it is better if he does not. (HCOB 29 Apr 69)

ASSESSMENT TRs, used to get a list to read. Assessment
questions are delivered with impingement, the auditor accenting
or “barking” the last word and syllable. An assessment is done
crisply and businesslike with real punch (not shouting) so each
line is to the pc. This is not to say that an assessment is done
tone 40 or with antagonism. It’s friendly but businesslike and
impinges. (BTB 13 Mar 75)

ASSESS ON PRE-HAV, to assess the whole pre-hav scale.
(HCOB 13 Jul 61)

ASSIST, 1. an action undertaken by a minister to assist the spirit
to confront physical difficulties which can then be cared for with
medical methodology by a medical doctor as needful. (Abid MA,
241) 2. anything which is done to alleviate a present time
discomfort. (Abil 73) 3. simple, easily done processes that can be
applied to anyone to help them recover more rapidly from
accidents, mild illness or upsets. (Sen AD) 4. the processing
given to a recently injured person in order to relieve the stress
of live energy which is holding the injury in suspension. (Sen
8-8008, p. 38) See also CONTACT ASSIST, TOUCH ASSIST,
AUDITING ASSIST.

ASSIST ENGRAM, in the case of the manic, the fanatic or the
zealot an engram has entirely blocked at least one of the purpose
lines deriving from a dynamic. The engram may be called an
assist engram. Its own surcharge (not the dynamic force) leads
the individual to believe that he has a high purpose which will
permit him to escape pain. This “purpose” is a false purpose not
ordinarily sympathetic with the organism, having a hectic
quality derived from the pain which is part of it, even though

26
ATTENTION

that pain is not wittingly experienced. This assist engram is
using the native ability of the organism to accomplish its false
“purpose” and brings about a furious and destructive effort on
the part of the individual who, without this assist engram could
have better accomplished the same goal. The worst feature of
the assist engram is that the effort it commands is engramic
dramatization of a particular sort, and if the engram itself is
restimulated the individual becomes subject to the physical pain
and fear which the entire experience contained. Therefore, the
false purpose itself is subject to sporadic “sag.” (DTOT, p. 77)

ASSOCIATIVE DEFINITION, see DEFINITIONS, TYPES OF.

ASSOCIATIVE RESTIMULATORS, 1. those things connected
with the restimulator. (DMSMH, p. 354) 2. a perceptic in the
environment which is confused with an actual restimulator.
(DTOT Gloss)

ASSUMPTION, 1. the name given to the act of a theta being
taking over a mest body. This is occasionally found to be part of
the record of the GE strong enough to be audited. It is the
sensation of being taken over thoroughly, sometimes contains
the shock of contact. The assumption takes place in most cases
just prior to birth for every GE generation. (HOM, p. 37)
2. assumption point: where the thetan has taken over the body.
(PAB 8)

ASTRAL BODIES, somebody’s delusion. Astral bodies are usually
mock-ups which the mystic then tries to believe real. He sees
the astral body as something else and then seeks to inhabit it in
the most common practices of “astral walking.” Anyone who
confuses astral bodies with thetans is apt to have difficulty with
theta clearing for the two things are not the same order of
similarity. (Sen 8-8008 Gloss)

ATE, Auditors’ Training Evening. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

ATTENTION, 1. when interest becomes fixed, we have attention.
(COHA, p. 99) 2. a motion which must remain at an optimum
effort. Attention is aberrated by becoming unfixed and sweeping
at random or becoming too fixed without sweeping. (Scn 0-8,
p. 75)

27
ATTENTION UNIT

ATTENTION UNIT, 1. a theta energy quantity of awareness
existing in the mind in varying quantity from person to person.
(HCOB 11 May 65) 2. actually energy flows of small wave-
lengths and definite frequency. These are measurable on specifi-
cally designed oscilloscopes and meters. No special particle is
involved. (Sen 8-80, p. 45)

ATTENTION VALENCE, 1. the valence one has assumed
because it got attention from another valence. (PAB 95) 2. one
has become the valence B because one wants attention from C.
Example—one becomes mother because mother received atten-
tion from father while self did not. (FOT, p. 95)

AUD, auditor. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
AUD C, Auditors’ Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

AUDIO IMAGERY, when a person can recall things he has heard
by sirnply hearing them again. (Exp Jour Winter-Spring 1950)

AUDIO-SEMANTIC, part of the standard banks, a special part of
sound files; the recording of words heard. (DMSMH, p. 46)

AUDIT FOREVER CASE, the grind case, the audit forever case
is an afraid to find out case. (HCOB 15 Mar 62)

AUDITING, 1. the application of Sen processes and procedures to
someone by a trained auditor. (BTB 30 Sept 71 IV) 2. the action
of asking a preclear a question (which he can understand and
answer), getting an answer to that question and acknowledging
him for that answer. Auditing gets rid of unwanted barriers that
inhibit, stop or blunt a person’s natural abilities as well as
gradiently increasing the abilities a person has so that he
becomes more able and his survival, happiness and intelligence
increase enormously. (BTB 30 Sept 71 IV) 3. Sen processing is
called auditing by which the auditor (practitioner) listens,
computes, and commands. (FOT, p. 88) 4. to get a result on a pe.
(SH Spec 71, 6607C26) 5. an activity of an auditor taking over the
control of and shepherding the attention of a pe so as to bring
about a higher level of confront ability. (SH Spec 48, 6108C31) 6.
directing the pe’s attention on his own case and directing his
ability to talk to the auditor. (SH Spec 49, 6109C05) 7. the
reversing of other-determined flows by gradient scales, putting

28
AUDITING COMMAND

the pe at cause again. (HCOB 7 May 59) 8. a communicating
process or a communication process with the end goal of raising
the ability of another person so that he can handle his bank,
body, others, and environment in general. (5707C17) 9. the process
of bringing a balance between freedom and barriers. Auditing is
a game of exteriorization versus havingness. (A bil 25)

AUDITING ASSIST, an assist done by a trained auditor using an
E-meter. It consists of “running out” the physically painful
experience the person has just undergone, accident, illness,
operation or emotional shock. This erases the “physical trauma”
and speeds recovery to a remarkable degree. (HCOB 2 Apr 69)

AUDITING BY LIST, 1. a technique using prepared lists of
questions. These isolate the trouble the pe is having with
auditing. Such lists also cover and handle anything that could
happen to a student or staff member. (LRH ED 257 Int) 2. the
earlier genus of this process was sec checking on the Joburg.
Any list can be used. The questions asked are generalized and
without time limiters; i.e. Has a withhold been missed? Have
you been given a wrong goal? etc. If the line when asked has an
instant read, say “That reads” then “What do you consider this
could be?” or “What considerations do you have about this?” Let
the pe answer all he wants to. This is continued until the line
goes clean. If the line does not read say “That’s clean” and move
on to the next line of the list. This process gets charge off the
case. (HCOB 23 Apr 64) [This process was later revised as
follows.] 3. we now F/N everything, we do not tell the pe what
the meter is doing. This changes auditing by lists in both
respects. We do not say to the pc, “That’s clean” or “That
reads.” Use any authorized published list. Green Form for
general review, L1C for ARC breaks, L4B for listed items, list
errors. You are looking for an instant read that occurs at the
end of the exact syllable of the question. If the question reads
look expectantly at the pe. You can repeat the question by just
saying it again if pe doesn’t begin to talk. (HCOB 3 Jul 71) [The
above is a brief summary only. The full exact procedure can be
found in the referenced HCOBs.]

AUDITING COMMAND, 1. a certain, exact command which the
preclear can follow and perform. (FOT, p. 88) 2. an auditing

29
AUDITING COMMAND CYCLE

command, when executed, has had performed exactly what it
said and nothing else. An auditing command has no understoods
about it. There is no pre-arrangement about an auditing command
except maybe knowing the language. (SH Spec 25, 6107C05)

AUDITING COMMAND CYCLE, auditor asks, pc replies and
knows he has answered, auditor acknowledges. Pe knows
auditor has acknowledged. That is a full auditing command
cycle. (HCOB 12 Nov 59)

AUDITING COMM CYCLE, this is the auditing comm cycle that
is always in use: 1) is the pe ready to receive the command?
(appearance, presence), 2) auditor gives command/question to
pe (cause, distance, effect), 3) pe looks to bank for answer (itsa
maker line), 4) pe receives answer from bank, 5) pc gives answer
to auditor (cause, distance, effect), 6) auditor acknowledges pce,
7) auditor sees that pe received ack (attention), 8) new cycle
beginning with (1). (HCOB 30 Apr 71)

AUDITING CYCLE, 1. the basic of auditing is an auditing cycle of
command which operates as an attention director. Call it a
restimulator if you want, but it’s an attention director, eliciting
a response from the pe to as-is that area and who knows he has
done so when he receives from the practitioner an acknowledg-
ment that it has occurred. That is the auditing cycle. (SH Spec
189, 6209C18) 2. there are basically two communication cycles
between the auditor and the pc that make up the auditing cycle.
They are cause, distance, effect with the auditor at cause and
the pe at effect, and cause, distance, effect, with the pc at cause
and the auditor at effect. These are completely distinct one from
the other. (HCOB 23 May 71R IV)

AUDITING GOOFS, minor unintentional omissions or mistakes in
the application of Scn procedures to a person by a trained
Scientologist. (JSE, p. 37)

AUDITING PROCEDURE, the general model of how one goes
about addressing a preclear. (FOT, p. 96)

AUDITING SESSION, 1. a precise period of time during which
the auditor listens to the preclear’s ideas about himself. (Abi
155) 2. a period in which an auditor and preclear are in a quiet
place where they will not be disturbed. The auditor gives the
preclear certain and exact commands which the preclear can
follow. (FOT, p. 88)

30
AUDITOR COMM LAG

AUDITING SUPERVISOR, on the Saint Hill Special Briefing
Course and in academies, supervision of the auditing section is
done by the auditing supervisor, and auditing instructor or
instructors. The auditing supervisor (or in some cases the course
supervisor as at Saint Hill) assigns all sessions and teams. (HCO
PL 21 Oct 62)

AUDITOR, 1. one who listens and computes; a Sen practitioner.
(HCOB 26 May 59) 2. one who has been trained in the
technology of Sen. An auditor applies standard technology to
preclears. (Aud 88 UK) 3. a person who through church training
becomes skilled in the successful application of Dn and Sen to his
family, friends and the public to achieve the ability gained as
stated on the Gradation Chart for his class of training. (FBDL
18, 2 Dec 70) 4. Sen processing is done on the principle of
making an individual look at his own existence, and improve his
ability to confront what he is and where he is. An auditor is the
person trained in the technology and whose job it is to ask the
person to look, and get him to do so. The word auditor is used
because it means one who listens, and a Scn auditor does listen.
(Sen 0-8, p. 14) 5. the word auditor is used, not “operator” or
“therapist,” because auditing is a cooperative effort between the
auditor and the patient, and the law of affinity is at work.
(DMSMG, p. 175) Abbr. Aud.

AUDITOR CLEARANCE, 1. rudiment: “Is it all right if I audit
you?” (HCOB 21 Mar 61) 2. beginning rudiment: “Are you
willing to talk to me about your difficulties?” (HCOB 21 Dec 61)

AUDITOR COMM LAG, lack of speed in giving commands.
(HCOB 9 Aug 69)

Auditor

31
AUDITOR C/S

AUDITOR C/S, a sheet on which the auditor writes the C/S
instructions for the next sessiqn. (BTB 3 Nov 72R)

AUDITOR EXPERTISE DRILLS, drills to improve the quality of
auditing by familiarizing auditors with the exact procedure of
each auditing action through the use of drills. These drills are
numbered as Expertise Drill-1 (ED-1), Expertise Drill-2 (ED-2),
ete. (BTB 20 Jul 74)

AUDITOR PRESENCE, 1. the impingement on a pc; familiarity,
certainty that something is going to happen, not scared of
confronting; ability to make an impact. (6102C14). 2. the auditor
is as real and has as much presence to the pc as the rudiments
stay in and has as little presence as the rudiments go out. (SH
Spec 78, 6111C09)

AUDITOR REPORT FORM, 1. an auditor’s report form is made
out at the end of each session. It gives an outline of what actions
were taken during the session. (BTB 6 Nov 72R VI) 2. they give
the details of the beginning of the session, condition of pc,
what’s intended, the wording of the process, total TA action.
(HCOB 24 Jul 64) Abbr. ARF.

AUDITOR RUDIMENT, 1. O/Ws off on Auditor or Auditors or
PCs until OK to be audited. (HCOB 8 Jan 60) 2. Auditor
Clearance is the most important of the rudiments because if the
Auditor is not cleared negative results will be obtained on the
profile of the preclear. To handle charge on the Auditor, TR 5N
should be run if charge does not blow on a little two-way comm.
Overt-Withhold on the Auditor is far too accusative and invali-
dates the PC. (HCOB 25 Jan 61) 3. Auditor Clearance, “Is it all
right if I Audit you?” if not, clear objection, or use TR5N or
“Who should I be to Audit you?” or “Who am I?” depending on
nature of the difficulty. (HCOB 21 Mar 61) [Note this HCOB was
later revised by the next referenced HCOB] 4. Auditor Clear-
ance, “Are you willing to talk to me about your difficulties?”
(HCOB 21 Dec 61)

AUDITOR’S CODE, 1. a list of the things one must or must not do
to preserve the theta-ness of theta and to inhibit the enturbula-
tion of theta by the auditor. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 12) 2. a collection of
rules (do’s and don’ts) that an auditor follows while auditing
someone, which ensures that the preclear will get the greatest
possible gain out of the processing that he is having. (Sen AD) 3.

32
AUTOMATICITY

the governing set of rules for the general activity of auditing.
(FOT, p. 88) 4. the Auditor’s Code was evolved from years of
observing processing. It is the technical code of Scientology. It
contains the important errors which harm cases. It could be
called the moral code of Sen. (COHA, p. 3)

AUDITOR’S HANDBOOK, the manual current at the time of the
Phoenix Lectures which contained the Axioms and the Route
One and Route Two processes of Intensive Procedure. It forms
the basis of and is wholly included in The Creation of Human
Ability. (PXL Gloss)

AUDITOR TRAINEE PROGRESS BOARD, a vertical auditor
trainee progress board is kept by the intern supervisor. This has
a space under each of the headings, left to right. Boxes along the
top, left to right, serve to indicate the exact action the trainee is
doing. The trainee’s name is on a tab that is pinned to the space.
The name tab is merely dated each time it is moved to the right.
Thus the intern super can chase up any faltering student.
(HCOB 7 Jan 72)

AUTOGENETIC, there are two kinds of illness: the first could be
called autogenetic, which means that it originated within the
organism and was self-generated, and exogenetic, which means
that the origin of the illness was exterior. Psychosomatic illness
would be autogenetic, generated by the body itself. (DMSMH,
p. 92)

AUTOMATIC BANK, when a pc gets picture after picture after
picture all out of control. This occurs when one isn’t following an
assessed somatic or complaint or has chosen the wrong one
which the pc is not ready to confront or by overwhelming the pc
with rough TRs or going very nonstandard. (HCOB 23 Apr 69)

AUTOMATICITY, 1. a sudden very rapid machine-gun fire
outflow of answers given by the preclear. (HCOB 10 May 65) 2.
non-self-determined action which ought to be determined by the
individual. The individual ought to be determining an action and
he is not determining it. That’s a pretty broad consideration. It’s
something not under the control of the individual. But if we said,
something not under the control of the individual, as a total,
unqualified definition of automaticity, we would have this, then:
that car that just went down the street would be an automati-
city to you. You didn't have control of it. So this is not a

33
AUTOMATIC MOCK-UP

precision definition. The precision definition has “which ought to
be under the control of the individual.” (A bil 36) 3. anything that
goes on running outside the control of the individual. (Abi SW)
4, something set up automatically to run without further
attention from yourself. (2ACC-6A 5311CM20) 5. there are three
kinds of automaticities, those which create things, and those
which make things persist, and those which destroy things.
(2ACC-19A 5312CM09)

AUTOMATIC MOCK-UP, a picture of something which didn’t
really happen. (PAB 99)

AUX. P.H., auxiliary pre-hav scale. (HCOB 3 Dec 61)

AVU, 1. Authority and Verifications Unit. (HCO PL 15 Aug 73)
also known as 2. Authorizations and Verifications Unit. (HCO PL
28 Jul 78RA)

AWARENESS, 1. the ability to perceive the existence of. (HCOB
4 Jan 73) 2. awareness itself is perception. (2ACC-8B 5311CM24)

AWARENESS LEVEL, see AWARENESS SCALE.

AWARENESS OF AWARENESS UNIT, 1. an actuality of no
mass, no wave-length, no position in space or relation in time,
but with the quality of creating or destroying mass or energy,
locating itself or creating space, and of re-relating time. (Dn 55!,
p. 29) 2. the individual himself. (56410CM20) 3. the thetan is the
awareness of awareness unit. (5410C10D)

AWARENESS SCALE, there are fifty-two levels of awareness
from Unexistence up to the state of Clear. By “level of
awareness” is meant that of which a being is aware. A being
who is at a level on this scale is aware only of that level and the
others below it. (HCO PL 5 May 65)

AXIOMS, 1. the Axioms are agreed-upon considerations. They
are the central considerations which have been agreed upon.
They are considerations. A self-evident truth is the dictionary
definition of an axiom. No definition could be further from the
truth. In the first place, a truth cannot be self-evident because it
is a static. So, therefore, there is no self-evidency in any truth.
There is not a self-evident truth, never has been, never will be.
However, there are self-evident agreements and that is what an
axiom is. (5501C21) 2. statements of natural laws on the order of
those of the physical sciences. (DMSMH, p. 6)

34
B

BACHELOR OF SCIENTOLOGY, the standard B Sen/HCS
course is in actuality the 20th ACC. The tapes to be used are the
20th ACC tapes. The texts are Scientology Clear Procedure
Issue One and ACC Clear Procedure as published in booklet
form. The B Sen/HCS course is five weeks in length. If comm
course and upper indoc have not been covered by the student,
the course becomes seven weeks in length. (HCOB 26 Dec 58)
Abbr. B. Sen.

BACK TO BATTERY, Slang. an artillery term. A gun, after it
fires, is said to go out of battery, which is to say, it recoils. Then
after it’s fired it’s supposed to go back to battery, which is
sitting the way you see them in photographs. They use the term
in slang to indicate somebody who is now fixed up. So this guy
will be all right for something or, what he has had will now be
over. I could give you a purer definition, and say it is a
completed case for that level, but the C/S doesn’t normally
think like that. (7204C07 SO II)

BAD CONTROL, a fallacy actually, control is either well done or
not done. If a person is controlling something he is controlling it.
If he is controlling it poorly, he is not controlling it. A machine
which is being run well is controlled. A machine which is not

35
BAD INDICATORS

being run well is not being controlled. Therefore we see that bad
control is actually a not-control. People who tell you that control
is bad are trying to tell you that automobile accidents and
industrial accidents are good. (POW, p. 40)

BAD INDICATORS, the condition isn’t getting any better, not
getting a lessening of the condition. Because we're not getting a
lessening of the condition we therefore have losses. (SH Spec 8,
6401C09) See also INDICATORS.

Bad Indicators

BAD MEMORY, 1. accumulated occlusion of it all, but it’s
nevertheless nonconfront. (SH Spec 72, 6607C28) 2. interposed
blocks between control center and facsimiles. (HFP Gloss) See
also AMNESIA.

BAD NEEDLE, a rock slam or a dirty needle or a stuck needle or
a stage four needle. (HCO PL 30 Aug 70)

BANK, 1. the mental image picture collection of the pc. It comes
from computer technology where all data is in a “bank.” (HCOB
30 Apr 69) 2. a colloquial name for the reactive mind. This is
what the procedures of Sen are devoted to disposing of, for it is
only a burden to an individual and he is much better off without
it. (Sen AD) 3. merely a combination of energy and significance
and this comprises a mass that sits there in its own made up

36
BARK

space, and it’s plotted against the pc’s experiential track known
as time. (SH Spec 65, 6507C27) See also REACTIVE MIND.

BANK-AGREEMENT, the common denominator of a group is the
reactive bank. Thetans without banks have different responses.
They only have their banks in common. They agree then only on
bank principles. The bank-agreement has been what has made
the earth a hell. (HCO PL 7 Feb 65)

BANK BEEFING UP, the sensation of increasing solidity of
masses in the mind. (HCOB 19 Jan 67)

BANK MONITOR, the file clerk is the bank monitor. “He”
monitors for both the reactive engram bank and the standard
banks. (DMSMH, p. 198) See FILE CLERK.

BANKY, Slang. a term which means that a person is being
influenced by his bank and is displaying bad temper, irritability,
lack of cooperation and the signs of dramatization. He is being
irrational. (Sen AD)

BARK, assessments are done to impinge and get a meter to read.
The auditor barks the last word and the last syllable so it does
impinge. You don’t drop your voice or downcurve your voice
tone at the end of the line as that will cost you reads. You punch
the last sylable to make it read and to the pe. The accent is at
the end of the sentence routinely, not on the earliest part. (BTB

13 Mar 75)

Barrier (Def. 2)
AN matter

37
BARRIER

BARRIER, 1. something which an individual cannot communicate
beyond. (Dn 55!, p. 126) 2. space, energy, matter and time—
each is only a barrier to knowingness. A barrier is a barrier only
in that it impedes knowingness. (COHA, p. 151) 3. from
Scientology Axiom 28: Barriers consist of Space, Interpositions
(such as walls and screens of fast-moving particles) and Time.
(COHA, p. 18) .

Barrier (Def. 2) fe) C)

space

O

BASIC, 1. the first incident (engram, lock, overt act) on any
chain. (HCOB 15 May 63) 2. the first experience recorded in
mental image pictures of that type of pain, sensation, dis-
comfort, etc. Every chain has its basic. It is a peculiarity and a
fact that when one gets down to the basic on a chain, (a) it
erases and (b) the whole chain vanishes for good. Basic is simply
earliest. (HCOB 23 Apr 69)

BASIC AREA, 1. the time track from the first recording on the
sperm or ovum track to the first missed menstrual period of the
mother. (SOS Gloss) 2. early prenatal. (DMSMH, p. 224)

38
BASIC INDIVIDUAL

BASIC AUDITING, 1. the fundamental and most important
elements of auditing—the skill of handling and keeping the
preclear in session, proper use of the auditing communication
cycle, the repetitive use of the auditing communication cycle to
flatten a process, the correct application of the technology of
Sen, and the ability to use and read and E-meter correctly. (Sen
AD) 2. the handling of the pe as a being, the auditing cycle, the
meter. (HCOB 26 Nov 63)

BASIC-BASIC, 1. this belongs in Sen, not Dn. It means the most
basic basic of all basics and results in clearing. It is found on the
Clearing Course. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) 2. the first engram on the
whole time track.(HCOB 15 May 68) 3. any similar circumstance
repetitive through a person’s whole track has a first time it
occurred and that first time that it occurred we call basic-basic.
(SH Spec 69, 6110C19)

BASIC CYCLE OF ACTION, create, resist effects (survive) and
destroy; create an object, have it resist effects (survive) and
then destroy it; create a situation, continue it and change it, and
destroy or end it. (COHA, p. 249)

BASIC ENGRAM, the earliest engram on an engram chain.
(DTOT, p. 112) See also BASIC.

BASIC GOAL, that goal native to the personality for a lifetime. It
is second only in importance to survival itself. It is incident to
the individuation of the person. A child of two knows its basic
goal. It is compounded from genetic generations of experience.
It can be found and reduced in some long past heavy effort
facsimile such as death. It is neither advisable nor inadvisable to
tamper with it. Much experience aligns on it. Desensitized, it
would be supplanted by another basic goal. (AP&A, p. 42)

BASIC INDIVIDUAL, 1. the basic individual is not a buried
unknown or a different person, but an intensity of all that is best
and most able in the person. The basic individual equals the
same person minus his pain and dramatizations. (DTOT, pp.
36-37) 2. basic individual and Clear are nearly synonymous since
they denote the unaberrated self in complete integration and in
a state of highest possible rationality. A Clear is one who has

39
BASIC LIE

become the basic individual through auditing. (DTOT, p. 34) See
also CLEAR.

BASIC LIE, the basic lie is that a consideration which was made
was not made or that it was different. (PXZ, p. 181)

BASIC OVERT ACT, making somebody else want mest. (HCOB
17 Mar 60)

BASIC PERSONALITY, 1. a person’s own identity. (FOT, p. 31)
2. the basic personality, the file clerk, the core of “I” which
wants to be in command of the organism, the most fundamental
desires of the personality, may be considered synonymous for
our purposes. (DMSMH, p. 394) 3. the individual himself.
(DMSMH, p. 394) Abbr. B.P. (BP).

BASIC PRINCIPLE OF EXISTENCE, the basic principle of
existence is survival and that is only true for the body. A spirit
cannot help but survive whether in heaven or in hell or on earth
or in a theta trap. (Abil Mi 5)

BASIC PROGRAM, the program laid out in the Classification and
Gradation Chart. (HCOB 12 Jun 70)

BASIC PURPOSE, it is a clinical fact that basic purpose is
apparently known to the individual before he is two years of
age: talent and inherent personality and basic purpose go
together as a package. They seem to be part of the genetic
pattern. (DMSMH, p. 238)

BASICS OF SCIENTOLOGY, axioms, scales, codes, fundamental
theory about the thetan and the mind. (HCOB 3 May 62)

BASIC TRUTH, a static has no mass, meaning, mobility, no
wave-length, no time, no location in space, no space. This has
the technical name of “basic truth.” (PXZ, p. 180)

BA STEPS, bring about steps—R6 materia]. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
B.D., before Dianetics. (DMSMH, p. 266)

BD, blowdown. (SH Spec 309, 6309C19)

B.E., before earth. (5203CM10)

40
BEINGNESS

BEAUTY, beauty is a wave-length closely resembling theta or a
harmony approximating theta. (Sen 8-80, p. 26)

BE, DO, HAVE, see CONDITIONS OF EXISTENCE.

BEEP METER, a machine developed by Volney Mathison for
chiropractors from a model furnished him by a chiropractor.
Wherever a person has a painful spot on his body, if you put the
electrode on it, the machine goes “beep,” but right alongside of
the painful spot, it doesn’t beep. (ESTO 6, 7203C03 SO III)

BEFORE EARTH, a theta line incident. There is a before earth
and a before mest universe in all banks. The incidents are not
dissimilar. The only thing remarkable about these before inci-
dents is that they are a very definite degradation and condemna-
tion of the preclear. (HOM, p. 66) Abbr. B.E.

BEGINNING RUDIMENTS, 1. rudiments at the beginning of
session involve: (1) getting pe comfortable in environment; (2)
getting pe willing to talk to auditor about pc’s own case; (3)
getting off withholds; (4) checking for and handling PTPs. The
above are the beginning rudiments. (HCOB 14 Dec 61) 2. are
normally devoted to getting the atmosphere and the environ-
ment out of the road, so you can audit the pe. (SH Spec 45,
6108C24)

BEHAVIOR PATTERNS, conflicts in the commands contained in
engrams and conflicts between the basic drive and the engramic
contents combine into behavior patterns. (DTOT, p. 55)

BEING, 1. a viewpoint; he is as much a being as he is able to
assume viewpoints. (Scn 8-8008, p. 17) 2. an energy production
source. (Sen 8-80, p. 33) See also THETAN.

BEINGNESS, 1. the assumption or choosing of a category of
identity. Beingness is assumed by oneself or given to oneself, or
is attained. Examples of beingness would be one’s own name,
one’s profession, one’s physical characteristics, one’s role in a
game—each and all of these things could be called one’s
beingness. (NSOL, p. 50) 2. the person one should be in order to
survive. (SH Spec 19, 6106C23) 3. essentially, an identification
of self with an object. (COHA, p. 76)

41
BEINGNESS OF MAN

Beingness (Def. 1)
see definition on
previous page

BEINGNESS OF MAN, essentially the beingness of theta itself
acting in the mest and other universes in the accomplishment of
the goals of theta and under the determination of a specific
individual and particular personality for each being. (Sen 8-8008,
p. 11)

BEINGNESS PROCESSING, is an alter-isness process. When a
case is extremely inverted it is necessary to get the case up to a
level where it can identify itself with something. Beingness is
essentially identification of self with an object. In running
beingness processing it will be discovered that the imagination
of the preclear revives to a marked extent. Beingness proc-
essing recovers the various valences which the thetan is trying
to avoid. The matter of valences is also a matter of packages of
abilities, and where an individual is unable to be something
which has certain definite abilities, he also cannot achieve those’
abilities, and this, in itself, is the heart of disability. (COHA, pp.
76-79)

BEING OTHER BODIES, 1. out of valence; being another
identity than his own. He’s in one body and he’s being another
body. (5904C08) 2. that’s shame. There is an emotion of shame
connected with being other bodies. One is ashamed to be
oneself, he is somebody else. (5904C08)

BELOW THE CENTER LINE, the American APA has a center
line which is zero, above which we get plus and below which we

42
BIG MIDDLE RUDIMENTS

get minus. An OCA is essentially the same thing, except the
OCA has a better center graph. There are two conditions here
below the center line: any negative, and “in the white.”
(7203C30SO)

BENEFIT, defined as that which would enhance survival. (Sen

&-8008, p. 6)
B.E.R., bad exam report. (BTB 5 Nov 72R III) See also RED
TAG.

BETRAYAL, 1. a betrayal is help turned to destruction. When
help fails, destruction occurs, or so goes the most basic
consideration behind living..(HCOB 6 Feb 58) 2. the knock-in of
anchor points. One’s anchor points are pulled out and then they
are suddenly knocked in. That operation, when done exteriorly
by somebody else is betrayal. (Spr Lect 17 5304CM08)

BETTER, negative gain, things disappear that have been annoy-
ing or unwanted. (HCOB 28 Feb 59)

BETTERMENT, to us, is a lessening of a bad condition. (SH Spec
3, 6401009)

BETTERMENT LAG, how many hours you have to process a
preclear before he can become cause. (5410CMO06)

BETWEEN-LIVES AREA, 1. the experiences of a thetan during
the time between the loss of a body and the assumption of
another. (PXL, p. 105) 2. at death the theta being leaves the
body and goes to the between-lives area. Here he “reports in,”
is given a strong forgetter implant and is then shot down to a
body just before it is born. At least that is the way the old
Invader in the earth area was operating. (HOM, p. 68)

BETWEEN SESSIONS, we don’t mean overnight. We mean
solely, strictly, completely and utterly if they get out of the
auditor’s sight at any time during a break. (SH Spec 7, 6106C05)

BIG MIDDLE RUDIMENTS, the big mid ruds can be used in the
following places: At the start of any session. Examples: “Since
the last time I audited you . . .” “Since the last time you were
audited . . .” “Since you decided to be audited . . .” In or at the

43
BIG THETA BOP

end of any session. Examples: “In this session . . .” On a list.
Examples: “On this list . . .” “On (say list question) .. .” Ona
goal or item. Example: “On (say goal or item) . . .” Here is the
correct wording and order of use for big mid ruds. “. . . has
anything been suppressed?” “. . . is there anything you have
been careful of?” “. . . is there anything you have failed to
reveal?” “. . . has anything been invalidated?” “. . . has anything
been suggested?” “. . . has any mistake been made?” “. . . is
there anything you have been anxious about?” “. . . has anything
been protested?” “. . . has anything been decided?” (HCOB 8
Mar 63) Abbr. B.M.R.

BIG THETA BOP, one-third of the dial back and forth or one-half
of the dial back and forth, something like that. That’s a bop on
the loss of and still trying to hold onto the home universe. (PDC
15)

BIG TIGER, the same drill as the tiger drill except that it
additionally uses nearly found out, protest, anxious about and
careful of. One shifts to big tiger when making sure of the last
item in on the list or a goal that fires strongly. (HCOB 29 Nov
62) See also TIGER DRILL.

BIRTH, 1. birth is one of the most remarkable engrams in terms
of contagion. Here the mother and child both receive the same
engram which differs only in the location of pain and the depths
of “unconsciousness.” Whatever the doctors, nurses and other
people associated with the delivery say to the mother during .
labor and birth and immediately afterwards before the child is
taken away is recorded in the reactive bank, making an identical
engram in both mother and child. (DMSMH, p. 136) 2. birth is
ordinarily a severely painful unconscious experience. It is
ordinarily an engram of some magnitude. Anyone who has been
born then possesses at least one engram. (DTOT, p. 52)

BIs, bad indicators. (BTB 6 Nov 72RA IV)

BLAB, Slang. there may once in a while be a person who reads
nicely at their clear reading with no action and you're very
suspicious the guy isn’t Clear. This could be a complete “blab”
no responsibility case—a mockery of Clear. (HCOB 26 May 60,
Security Checks)

44
BLACK FIVE

BLACK AND WHITE, 1. the name of a string of incidents where
the theta body was implanted with electronic waves. (5208
CMO07C) 2. the two extreme manifestations of perception on the
part of the preclear. Seeing whiteness or color the thetan is able
to discern or differentiate between objects, actions and spatial
dimensions. Energy can also manifest itself as blackness. (Scn
8-8008, p. 50) 3. a rapid process which eliminates the need for
running single incidents, locks, or secondaries, and is effective
only in occluded cases. Wide-open cases cannot see black or
white, but see color. These black areas, which are curtains over
occluded facsimiles along the time track, erase, or become
white, when attention is centered on them, and turning the field
white by concentrating on the aesthetic band is the only concern
of the auditor or preclear. Heavy somatics may be expected
during “black and white” processing, but these can be avoided
by keeping the field white. (Scn 8-80 Gloss)

BLACK DIANETICS, 1. hypnotism. (5109C17A) 2. unscrupulous
groups and individuals have been practicing a form a Black
Dianetics on their fellow man for centuries. They have not called
it that but the results have been and are the same. There are
those who, to control, resort to narcotics, suggestion, gossip,
slander—the thousands of overt and covert ways that can be
classified as Black Dianetics. (Sen Jour Iss 3G)

BLACK FIELD, just some part of a mental image picture where
the preclear is looking at blackness. It is part of some lock,
secondary or engram. In Sen it can occur (rarely) when the pc is
exterior, looking at something black. It responds to R3R.
(HCOB 23 Apr 69)

BLACK FIELD CASE, a case that could not run engrams because
he could not see them. (HCOB 14 Jan 60)

BLACK FIVE, 1. a heavily occluded case characterized by mental
pictures consisting of masses of blackness. This is a “step V” in
early procedures such as Standard Operating Procedure 8.
(PXL, p. 141) 2. a level of nonperception, whether the person is
seeing blackness or invisibility. (SH Spec 271, 6305C20) 3. a
no-responsibility case. (COHA, p. 161)

45
BLACKNESS

BLACKNESS, 1. usually the protective coating between the
preclear and the pictures. (Abil SW, p. 15) 2. both of these
conditions regarding blackness exist. The machine that makes
blackness and having a black picture in restimulation; there is
also simply the blackness of looking around inside a head. (Abil
SW, p. 15) 3. the blackness on the case is indicative of a scarcity
of viewpoints, a necessity for safeguarding and protective
“screens,” a defensive and propitiative attitude towards exist-
ence, too much loss of allies and good, too much loss of space and
finally and most importantly, loss of those who have evaluated
for the preclear. The sudden departure of the person who has
evaluated for the preclear results in loss of that viewpoint which
the preclear unwittingly had assumed. (PAB 8) 4. either the pe’s
unwillingness to face things or his basic bank. It cures if you do
Dianetics by gradients. (HCOB 3 Apr 66)

BLACKNESS OF CASES, the blackness of cases is an accumula-
tion of the case’s own or another’s lies. (PXL, p. 183)

¢
Black Panther (Def. 2)
attack
y®
flee ; ‘ ,

46

BLACK PANTHER MECHANISM

*2) SHHH

avoid

neglect

succumb

BLACK PANTHER MECHANISM, 1. in Dn considerable slang
has been developed by patients and Dianeticists and they call
the “Black Panther Mechanism” a neglect of the problem. One
supposes this stems from the ridiculousness of biting black
panthers. (DMSMH, p. 147) 2. there are five ways in which a

47
BLAME

human being reacts toward a source of danger. Let us suppose
that a particularly black-tempered black panther is sitting on
the stairs and that a man named Gus is sitting in the living
room. Gus wants to go to bed. But there is the black panther.
The problem is to get upstairs. There are five things that Gus
can do: (1) he can go attack the black panther; (2) he can run out
of the house and flee the black panther; (3) he can use the back
stairs and avoid the black panther; (4) he can neglect the black
panther; and (5) he can succumb to the black panther. These are
the five mechanisms. All actions can be seen to fall within these
courses. And all actions are visible in life. (DMSMH, pp.
147-148)

BLAME, 1. it’s simply punishing other bodies. (5904C08) 2. when
one individual assigns cause to another entity, he delivers power
to that entity. This assignment may be called blame, the
arbitrary election of cause. (DAB, Vol. II, p. 233) 3. blame is the
negation of your responsibility. You can blame self, that’s the
last stage, or you can blame somebody else. That’s an effort not
to be responsible. (5112CM28B)

BLANKET, to settle down over a mest body (one or more mest
bodies). (5206CM26B)

BLANKETING, this incident consists of throwing oneself as a
thetan over another thetan or over a mest body. Blanketing is
done to obtain an emotional impact or even to kill. It is strongest
in sexual incidents where the thetan throws two mest bodies
together in the sexual act in order to experience their emotions.
(HOM, p. 62)

BLINDNESS, extreme unawareness. (PAB 117)

BLIND REPAIR, when no FES is done, or when the pc has lost
' his folder, one is doing a blind repair. The progress program and
advance program may have holes in them. (HCOB 6 Oct 70)

BLINKLESS TR 0, there is no such thing. Sitting with any
attention on the body just isn’t confront—you aren’t doing the
drill right. If your body blinks then OK, but if you are making it
blink by having attention on the eyes then your TR 0 is out.
(HCOB 8 Dec 74)

48
BOARD POLICY LETTERS

BLOCKING OUT, identifying incidents on the time track by
dating, moving the time track to that date, asking the pc what is
there, finding the duration, moving the pc through it to the end,
asking the pe what happened, checking for earlier beginning,
moving the pe through the incident again. (SH Spee 272,
6306C11)

BLOW, 7.1. the sudden dissipation of mass in the mind with an
accompanying feeling of relief. (Sen AD) 2. a definite manifesta-
tion and the pc must say “something blew” or “it disappeared”
or “it’s gone” or “it vanished,” not “I feel lighter.” (HCOB 24
Sept 71) 3. the phenomena of obsessive efforts to individuate.
(HCOB 12 Jan 61) 4. departures, sudden and relatively unex-
plained, from sessions, posts, jobs, locations and areas. (HCOB
81 Dec 59) —v. Slang. 1. unauthorized departure from an area,
usually caused by misunderstood data or overts. (HCOB 19 Jun
71 III) 2. leave, get out, rush away, cease to be where one
should really be or just cease to be audited. (BCR, p. 23)

BLOWDOWN, 1. a tone arm motion to the left made to keep the
needle on the dial. (HCOB 29 Apr 69) 2. a period of relief and
cognition to a pe while it-is occurring and for a moment after it
stops. When the auditor has to move the tone arm from right to
left to keep the needle on the dial and the movement is .1
divisions or more, then a blowdown is occurring. (HCOB 3 Aug
65) 3. a movement of the needle from left to right as you face a
meter with a hang-up at the right. That’s got to be included in
training. It’s whether or not the needle stays over to the right
that makes the blowdown, not what you do with the tone arm.
(SH Spec 21, 6406C04) 4. the meter reaction of having found the
correct by-passed charge. (HCOB 19 Aug 63) Abbr. BD.

BLOW-OFFS, see BLOW.

BLOW-UP, in the low tone arm case, means a sudden approach of
the tone arm from a non-optimum (below 2.0) reading toward
the optimum read. (HCOB 1 Sept 60)

BLUE SHEET, Return Programs (now called Advance Programs)
are on bright blue sheets. (HCOB 25 Jun 70)

B.M.R., big mid ruds. (SH Spec 320, 6310C31)

BOARD POLICY LETTERS, color flash—green ink on cream
paper. These are the issues of the Boards of Directors of the

49
BOARD TECHNICAL BULLETIN

Churches of Scientology and are separate and distinct from.
those HCO Policy Letters written by LRH. Only LRH issues
may be printed green on white for policy and only LRH issues
may have the prefix HCO. These Board issues are valid as
Policy. The purpose of this distinction is to keep LRH’s comm
lines pure and to clearly distinguish between Source material
and other issues and so that any conflict and/or confusion on
Source can easily be resolved. (BPL 14 Jan 74R I) Abbr. BPL.

BOARD TECHNICAL BULLETIN, color flash—red ink on cream
paper. These are the issues of the Boards of Directors of the
Churches of Scientology and are separate and distinct from
those HCO Bulletins written by LRH. Only LRH issues may be
printed red on white for Technical Bulletins and only LRH issues
may have the prefix HCO. These Board issues are valid as tech.
The purpose of this distinction is to keep LRH’s comm lines pure
and to clearly distinguish between Source material and other
issues and so that any conflict and/or confusion on Source can
easily be resolved. (BPL 14 Jan 74R I) Abbr. BTB.

BODHI, 1. one who has attained intellectual and ethical perfection
by human means. This probably would be a Dn Release. (PXL,
p. 18) 2. Bodhi means enlightenment or, alternately, one who
has attained intellectual and ethical perfection by human means.
(HOA, Intro)

BODY, 1. a carbon-oxygen engine which runs at 98.6°F. The theta
being is the engineer running this engine in a Homo sapiens.
(HOM, p. 42) 2. a solid appendage which makes the person
recognizable. (PAB 125) 3. an identifying form or non-identi-
fiable form to facilitate the control of, the communication of and
with, and the havingness for the thetan in his existence in the
mest universe. (HCOB 3 Jul 59) 4. the thetan’s communication
center. (CFC, p. 9) 5. a carbon-oxygen engine which runs on low
combustion fuel, generally derived from other life forms. The
body is directly monitored by the genetic entity in activities
such as respiration, heartbeat and endocrine secretions; but
these activities may be modified by the thetan. (Sen 8-8008, p. 8)
6. a physical object. It is not the being himself. As a body has
mass it tends to remain motionless unless moved and tends
to keep going in a certain direction unless steered. (HCOB 10
May 72)

50
BOGGED STUDENT

BODY IN PAWN, an incident of protecting bodies. Societies have
gone totally batty on the track with this and we call it bodies in
pawn. (5904C08)

BODY MOTION, any motion of the body which causes the tone
arm to move falsely up or down. Body motion is never recorded
in a session. (EMD, p. 25)

BODY-PLUS-THETAN SCALE, from 0.0 to 4.0 on the tone scale,
and the position on this scale is established by the social
environment and education of the composite being and is a’
stimulus-response scale. (Scn 8-8008, p. 76)

BODY REACTIONS, one of the ten main needle actions of an
E-meter. The deep breathing of a preclear, a sigh, a yawn, a
sneeze, a stomach growl can any one’ of them make a needle
react. They’re not important once you know what they are.
(EME, pp. 18-19)

BODY VALENCE, human identity. (HCOB 14 Jul 56)

BOGGED STUDENT, he is groggy or puzzled or frowning or even
emotionally upset by his misunderstood words. When not caught
and handled he will go to sleep or just stare into space. (HCO PL
26 Jun 72)

MESCLES
PROFDWLS

Body (Def. 5)

51
BOIL-OFF

BOIL-OFF, v. to become groggy and seem to go to sleep. (HFP,
p. 100) —n. 1. usually a flow running too long in one direction.
(7204C07 SO III) 2. a manifestation of unconsciousness, is very
mild, and simply means that some period of the person’s life
wherein he was unconscious has been slightly restimulated. (Scn
Jour ISS. 14-G) 3. a state of unconsciousness produced by a
confusion of effort impinging upon one area. It is a slow motion
unconsciousness. (PDC 29) 4. a condition of somnolence which is
sometimes indistinguishable from sleep. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 183)
5. boil-off was originally and sedately named “comatic reduction,”
but such erudition has been outvoted by the fact that it has
never been used. (DMSMBH, p. 303) 6. it actually is a flow which
is run too long in one direction. That’s what boil-off, anaten, etc.
is. (SH Spee 229, 6301C10)

BONUS PACKAGE, occasionally you get a bonus package off one
list. In addition to the item you are looking for, sometimes two
R/Sing items will show up on the same list opposing each other
and blow. They oppose each other, not what you're listing.
(HCOB 23 Nov 62) Abbr. BP.

BOOK AND BOTTLE, Opening Procedure by Duplication. Its
goal is the separating of time, moment from moment. This is
done by getting a preclear to duplicate the same action over and
over again with two dissimilar objects. In England this process
is called “Book and Bottle,” probably because these two familiar
objects are the most used in doing Opening Procedure by
Duplication. (Dn 55!/, p. 114)

BOOK AUDITOR, 1. someone who has successfully applied Sen
from a book to help someone else and who has received a
Hubbard Book Auditor certificate for doing so. (Sen AD) 2. some-
one who has studied books on Scn and listens to other people to
make them better. (Abi 155)

BOOK ONE CLEAR, Mest Clear. (Abi 87) See also MEST
CLEAR.

BOOK ONE OF DIANETICS, Dianetics: The Modern Science of
Mental Heaith. (HCO PL 25 Jan 57)

BOOK ONE OF SCIENTOLOGY, Scientology: The Fundamentals
of Thought. (HCO PL 25 Jan 57)

52
BP

BOREDOM, 1. boredom is not just not doing anything. Boredom
is an eddying back and forth which on its lower harmonic
becomes pain and on a lower harmonic becomes agony. (2ACC-
28B, 5312CM20) 2. boredom is not a state of inaction. It is a
state of idle action, vacillating action where penalties are yet in
existence, and where they are grave, but a state in which one
has decided he can’t really do anything about them. It’s just a
high-toned apathy. (PDC 59)

Boredom (Def. 2)

BORROWED FACSIMILES, facsimiles that aren't yours. That is
to say they are borrowed from people or they’re photographed
or they're taken right straight out of other theta beings, just
outright stolen; we call it borrowing. (5207CM24B)

BOTTOM TERMINAL, the terminal farthest from present time.
(SH Spec 306, 6309C11)

BOUNCER, 1. an engram which contains the species of phrase,
“can’t stay here,” “Get out!” and other phrases which will not
permit the preclear to remain in its vicinity but returns him to
present time. (DTOT, p. 129) 2. the preclear may be in an
engram and yet be bounced into present time. This creates a
situation in which the preclear seems to be in present time but is
actually under considerable tension being held in an engram.
(SOS, p. 106)

BP, bonus package. (HCOB 23 Nov 62)

53
B.P.

B.P., basic personality. The attention units called basic person-
ality. (DMSMH, p. 124)

BPC, by-passed charge. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

BPI, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: Broad Public
Issue. Give to HCOs of all types, all staff of central organiza-
tions, field Auditors, put in magazines, do what you like with it.
(HCO PL 22 May 59)

BPL, Board Policy Letter. (BPL 14 Jan 74R I)

BRACKET, 1. the standard bracket is a five-way bracket. The
general form of this is as follows: you . . . terminal; terminal .. .
you; terminal .. . another; another . . . terminal; terminal...
terminal. (HCOB 30 Apr 61) 2. the word bracket is taken from
the artillery, meaning to enclose with a salvo of fire. A bracket
is run as follows: first one gets the concept as happening to the
preclear. Then one gets the concept of the preclear making it
happen (or thinking or saying it) to another. Then one gets the
concept as being directed by another at others. (Sen 8-80, p. 40)
3. with these three things: the thetan trying to put up mock-ups
of his own which persist; trying to divert the mock-ups of
others; and trying to observe what others are doing to others;
we have what we call a bracket in Scn. (PAB 11) 4. the
individual does it himself, somebody else does it, others do it, or
the individual does it to somebody else, or somebody does it to
him or others do it to others. (PDC 31)

BRAIN, 1. another part of the nervous system which receives and
sends impulses to the body parts. (SPB) 2. a neuro-shock
absorber. It has very little to do with thinking. (SH Spee 75,
6608C16) 3. a very mechanical rattletrap sort of a switchboard
that’s been thrown together by you in order to translate thought
into action and to coordinate energy. (5203CM03B)

BREAK-ENGRAM, 1. a late engram which crosses chains of
engrams would be a “cross engram.” If such an engram resulted
in a loss of sanity it would be called a “break-engram.”
(DMSMH, p. 144) 2. the secondary engram after the receipt of
which the individual experienced a lowering of general tone to

54
BUBBLE GUM INCIDENT

2.5 or below and became therefore unable to cope with his
environment. (DTOT Gloss)

BREAKING A CASE, Slang. meaning that one breaks the hold of
the preclear on a nonsurvival facsimile, never breaking the
preclear or his spirit, but breaking what is breaking the
preclear. (HFP Gloss)

BRIDGE, THE, 1. the route to Clear, the bridge, which we call
the Classification, Gradation and Awareness Chart. (Aud 107
ASHO) 2. a term originating in early Dn days to symbolize
travel from unknowingness to revelation. (Aud 72 ASHO)

BROKEN, Slang. used in the wise of “breaking a case,” meaning
that one breaks the hold of the preclear on a nonsurvival
facsimile. Used in greater or lesser magnitude such as “breaking
a circuit” or “breaking into a chain” or “breaking a computation.”
Never breaking the preclear or his spirit, but breaking what’s
breaking the preclear. (HFP Gloss)

BROKEN DRAMATIZATION, where the individual has been
prevented from carrying out the commands of the engram which
is restimulated by present time environmental perceptics. (SOS,
Bk. 2, p. 118)

BROKEN DRAMATIZATION LOCKS, locks in which the chief
factor is that the individual has been prevented from completing
the dramatization of a restimulated engram. These are most
abundant at the 1.5 level. (SOS Gloss)

B.S., Beginning Scientologist. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

B. Sen., Bachelor of Scientology. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
B.T., before time. (5203CM10A)

BTB, Board Technical Bulletin. (BPL 14 Jan 74R 1)

BUBBLE GUM INCIDENT, 1. an incident on the track where you
are hit with motion and finally develop an obsession about
motion. (I wish you to carefully note these very technical terms
like bubble gum.) (5206CM23A) 2. the first incident on the track
that has any words in it and is usually the last incident on the

59
BUDDHA

track of any magnitude that has any words in it for millions of
years afterward. It sits there all by itself. It’s a verbal implant,
a thought implant. (5206CM25B)

BUDDHA, simply one who has attained bodhi. There have been
many buddhas and there are expected to be many more. (PAB
82)

Buddha

BUGGED, the word bugged is slang for snarled up or halted.
(HCO PL 29 Feb 72 II)

BULL-BAITING, in coaching certain drills, the coach attempts to
find certain actions, words, phrases, mannerisms or subjects
that cause the student doing the drill to become distracted from
the drill by reacting to the coach. As a bullfighter attempts to
attract the bull’s attention and control the bull, so does the
coach attempt to attract and control the student’s attention,
however the coach flunks the student whenever he succeeds in
distracting the student from the drill and then repeats the action
until it no longer has any effect on the student. Taken from a
Spanish and English sport of “baiting” which means “to set dogs
upon a chained bull,” but mainly “to attack or torment especially
with persistent insult, criticism or ridicule.” Also “to tease.”
(LRH Def. Notes)

BUREAU 5, (Continental Liaison Office) Bureau 5 covers the
standard functions done in Scientology Church Tech and Qual
Divisions. (SO ED 96 Int)

56
BY-PASSED CHARGE

BUTTERED ALL OVER THE UNIVERSE, 1. a preclear who
does not know where he is. The preclear has used remote
viewpoints, and has left remote viewpoints located all over
everywhere to such a degree that the preclear thinks he is
anyplace rather than where he is. (Dn 55/, pp. 145-146) 2. in his
failures to control the individual withdraws from things he has
attempted to contro] but leaves himself connected with them in
terms of “dead energy.” Thus we get the manifestation of
buttered all over the universe. (COHA, p. 123) 3. Colloquial; a
thetan unknowingly in contact with a large part of a universe.
(COHA, p. 74) 4. the lower harmonic of exteriorization, which is:
“I don’t want to be there and I’ve backed out in spite of myself.”
(5411C29) 5. the super reach case. He isn’t withdrawing, he’s
reaching, compulsively and he can’t stop himself. (2ACC-29A,
5312CM20)

BUTTON(S), 1. items, words, phrases, subjects or areas that
cause response or reaction in an individual by the words or
actions of other people, and which cause him discomfort,
embarrassment, or upset, or make him laugh uncontrollably.
(Sen AD) 2. things in particular that each human being finds
aberrative and has in common. (HFP, p. 127%) 3. restimulators,
words, voice tones, music, whatever they are—things which are
filed in the reactive mind bank as parts of engrams. (DMSMH,
p. 74) 4. (suppress button, invalidate button, etc.), it is called a
button because when you push it (say it) you can get a meter
reaction. (HCOB 29 Jan 70)

BUTTON CHART, chart of attitudes toward life. This might be
called a “button chart” for it contains the major difficulties
people have. (HFP, p. 38)

BY-PASS CIRCUITS, see DEMON CIRCUITS.

BY-PASSED CHARGE, 1. mental energy or mass that has been
restimulated in some way in an individual, and that is either
partially or wholly unknown to that individual and so is capable
of affecting him adversely. (Scn AD) 2. when one gets a lock, a
lower earlier incident restimulates. That is BPC. It isn’t the
auditor by-passing it. One handled later charge that restimu-
lated earlier charge. That is BPC (tech of ’62), and that is all
that the term means. (HCOB 10 Jun 72 I) 3. reactive charge that

57
BY-PASSED CHARGE ASSESSMENT

has been by-passed (restimulated but overlooked by both pe and
auditor). (BCR, p. 21) Abbr. BPC.

BY-PASSED CHARGE ASSESSMENT, 1. auditing by list to help
the preclear find by-passed charge. The moment the correct
by-passed charge is found the preclear feels much better. (Sen
AD) 2. a BPC assessment is actual auditing (Level III). Here one
cleans each smallest read of a question (but not cleaning cleans),
before going onto the next question, handling originations by
the pe and acknowledging. One never does this with an ARC
broken pe. With an ARC break one just ploughs on looking for a
big read and indicates it to pe. (BCR, p. 41) 3. a by-passed
charge assessment is auditing because you clean every read of
the needle on the list being assessed. The pe is acked, the pc is
permitted to itsa and give his opinions. But you never do a
by-passed charge assessment on an ARC broken pe. These two
different activities (by-passed charge assessment and ARC
break assessment) unfortunately have the word assessment in
common and they use the same lists, therefore some students
confuse them. (HCOB 7 Sept 64 II)

BY-PASSED ITEM, when a list has been made and includes a
reliable item and that reliable item was not used to find an item
in opposition to it, the item which was not so found is called a
by-passed item. (HCOB 17 Nov 62)

58
C

CALIBRATION, finding and marking the correct positions on the
tone arm dial so that TA 2 and TA 3 positions are known
precisely by the auditor at start of session. (EMD, p. 16A)

CALL-BACK, a type of action phrase which would, in present
time, cause the preclear to move back to another position in
space, and when contained in an engram would pull the preclear
down from present time into the engram. (SOS, p. 105)

CAL-MAG FORMULA, working on this in 1973, for other uses
than drug reactions, I found the means of getting calcium into
solution in the body along with magnesium so that the results of
both could be achieved. (HCOB 5 Nov 74)

CANCELLER, 1. in Dn processing we used to use what was called
a “canceller.” At the beginning of the session, the preclear was
told that anything which had been said to him would be
cancelled when the word cancelled was uttered at the end of the
session. This canceller is no longer employed, not because it was
not useful but because lock scanning provides the means of
scanning off all the auditing. This is a far more effective and
positive mechanism than the canceller. (SOS, Bk. 2, pp. 228-229)
2. a contract with the patient that whatever the auditor says
will not become literally interpreted by the patient or used by
him in any way. It prevents accidental positive suggestion.
(DMSMH, p. 200)

59
CANNED LIST

CANNED LIST, Slang. a pre-prepared and issued list. (7204C07
SO I)

CANS, electrodes for the E-meter. Steel soup or vegetable cans,
unpainted, tops cleanly removed, label and glue washed off, tin
plated or not, have been standard for many years. It is with
these that calibration has been done. (HCOB 14 Jul 70)

Cans

CAN’T HAVE, 1. it means just that—a depriving of substance or
action or things. (HCO PL 12 May 72) 2. denial of something to
someone else. (BTB 22 Oct 72) 3. a moment of pain or
unconsciousness is a moment of can’t have. If, at a certain
moment, an individual couldn’t have the environment, couldn’t
have the circumstances he was undergoing then it is a certainty
that he'll pile up an engram right at that spot in time. (Abil 34)

CAS, Church of American Science. (PAB 74)

CASE, the whole sum of past by-passed charge. (HCOB 19 Aug
63)

CASE ANALYSIS, 1. the determination of where pc’s attention
(at current state of case) is fixed on the track and restoring pc’s
determinism over those places. (HCOB 28 Feb 59) 2. the steps
for case analysis are (1) discover what the pc is sitting in, (2) get
the lies off, (3) locate and indicate the charge. (HCOB 14 Dec 63)

CASE CRACKING SECTION, a section in the Dept. of Review in
the Qualifications Division of a Scientology Church. This section
audits cases (students or HGC pes or other pes in difficulty such
as field auditor rejects) to a result. (HCO PL 24 Apr 65)

60
CAUSE

CASE V, 1. the definition of a case V is no mock-ups, only
blackness. (Sen 8-8008, p. 120) [For a complete list of the eight
levels of case of SOP 8-C, see STATES OF CASE SCALE. ]

CASE GAIN, 1. the improvements and resurgences a person
experiences from auditing. (Scn AD) 2. any case betterment
according to the pce. (Abil 155)

CASE HISTORIES, reports on preclears’ individual records.
(FOT, p. 15)

CASE LEVEL, see STATE OF CASE SCALE.

CASE PROGRESS SHEET, a sheet which details the levels of
processing and training the pc has achieved while moving up the
grade chart. It also lists incidental rundowns and setup actions
the pce has had. The sheet gives at a glance the pc’s progress to
OT. (BTB 3 Nov 72R)

CASE, STATES OF, see STATE OF CASE SCALE.

CASE SUPERVISOR, 1. that person in a Scientology Church who
gives instructions regarding, and supervises the auditing of
preclears. The abbreviation C/S can refer to the Case Super-
visor or to the written instructions of a case supervisor
depending on context. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) 2. the C/S is the case
supervisor. He has to be an accomplished and properly certified
auditor and a person trained additionally to supervise cases. The
C/S is the auditor's “handler.” He tells the auditor what to do,
corrects his tech, keeps the lines straight and keeps the auditor
calm and willing and winning. The C/S is the pc’s case director.
His actions are done for the pc. (Dn Today, Bk. 3, p. 545) Abbr.
C/S. See also C/S.

CATATONIA, 1. a psychiatric name for withdrawn totally.
(HCOB 24 Nov 65) 2. catatonia means the person is lying still in
apathy unmovingly and not reaching anything. (SH Spec 303,
6309C05)

CAUSATION, imposing time and space upon objects, people, self,
events and individuals. (Scn 8-80, p. 44)

CAUSE, 1. cause could be defined as emanation. It could be
defined also, for purposes of communication, as source-point.

61
CAVE IN

(FOT, p. 77) 2. a potential source of flow. (COHA, p. 258) 3. is
simply the point of emanation of the communication. Cause in
our dictionary here means only “source point.” (Dn 55!, p. 70)

Cause (Def. 2)

“CAVE IN,” (noun) “CAVED IN” (adjective), mental and/or
physical collapse to the extent that the individual cannot
function causatively. The individual is quite effect. A U.S.
Western term which symbolized mental or physical collapse as
like being at the bottom of a mine shaft or in a tunnel when the
supports collapsed and left the person under tons of debris.
(LRH Def. Notes)

CC, Clearing Course. (HCO PL 6 Sept 72 II)

CCHs, 1. a highly workable set of processes starting with control,
going to communication and leading to havingness in that order.
The CCHs are auditing specifically aimed at and using all the
parts of the two way comm formula. (BTB 12 Sept 63) 2. several
associated processes which bring a person into better control of
his body and surroundings, put him into better communication
with his surroundings and other people, and increase his ability
to have things for himself. They bring him into the present,
away from his past problems. (Scn AD) 3. actually, control,
communication and havingness. When you apply control, you
obtain communication which gives the preclear havingness. And
it is a method of entrance on cases which is rather infallible. (SH
Spec 9, 6106C07)

CCH-0, the sum of CCH-0 is find the auditor, find the auditing
room, find the pe, knock out any existing PT problem, establish

62
CERTAINTY

goals, clear help, get agreement on session length and get up to
the first real auditing command. CCH-0 isn’t necessarily run in
that order and this isn’t necessarily all of CCH-0, but if any of
these are seriously scamped, the session will somewhere get
into trouble. (SCP, p. 8)

CCH OB, clear help in brackets with a meter, running meter
toward a freer needle. (PAB 138)

CDEI, curiosity, desire, enforcement, inhibition. (BTB 1 Dec
71RB II)

CDEINR, curious, desired, enforced, inhibited, no, refused. (BTB
1 Dee 71RB II)

CELL, 1. the virus and cell are matter and energy animated and
motivated in space and time by theta. (Scn 0-8, p. 75) 2. a unit of
life which is seeking to survive and only to survive. (DMSMH,
p. 50)

CEN-O, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: to go to all
staff of Central Organizations only plus HCO Area Sec, HCO
Cont, HCO WW. (HCO PL 22 May 59)

CEN-O-CON, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: to go to Associa-
tion Secretaries or Organization Secretaries of Central Organiza-
tions only, not to staff; also to HCO Area Sec, HCO Cont, HCO
WW. (HCO PL 22 May 59) 2. modifies HCO PL 22 May 59, HCO
Policy Letters which are marked CenOCon may be issued to all
staff including HASI Personnel. (HCO PL 25 Jun 59)

CENT, central. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

CENTRAL ORG (ORGANIZATION), Church of Scientology
(Class IV). (HCO PL 6 Feb 66)

CERT, see CERTIFICATE.

CERTAINTY, 1. the degree of willingness to accept the aware-
ness of an is-ness. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13) 2. knowledge itself is
certainty; knowledge is not data. Knowingness is certainty.
Sanity is certainty, providing only that that certainty does not
fall beyond the conviction of another when he views it. To obtain
a certainty one must be able to observe. (COHA, p. 187) 3.
knowingness—knowing one knows—a state of beingness. (PAB

63
CERTAINTY PROCESSING

29) 4. measurement of the effort and locations and distances
necessary to make two points coincide at a certain instant in
time. And that is really a low level certainty. That is certainty
in terms of motion. (53811CM17A) 5. clarity of observation.
(COHA, p. 190)

CERTAINTY PROCESSING, the processing of certainties. The
anatomy of maybe consists of uncertainties and is resolved by
the processing of certainties. (Scn 8-8008, p. 126)

CERTIFICATE, an award given by the Hubbard Communications
Office to designate study and practice performed and skill
attained. It is not a degree as it signalizes competence whereas
degrees ordinarily symbolize merely time spent in theoretical
study and impart no index of skill. (Aud 2 UK) Abbr. Cert.

Certificate

CERTIFICATION COURSE, you teach the student the theory in
the certification course and the drills and key processes for the
grade in the classification course. (HCOB 22 Sept 65)

CERTIFICATION EXAM, this is a written test taken from the
HCOBs, tapes, policy letters of the theory material the student
studies. (FO 1685)

CHAIN, 1. a series of recordings of similar experiences. A chain
has engrams, secondaries and locks. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) 2.
incidents of similar nature strung out in time. (SH Spec 70,
6607C21) 3. a series of incidents of similar nature or similar
subject matter. (HCOB 1 Mar 62)

CHAIN OF INCIDENTS, 1. when one speaks of a chain of
incidents, one means usually a chain of locks or a chain of
engrams or a chain of secondaries which have similar content.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 194) 2, a whole adventure or activity related by

64
CHANGE OF CHARACTERISTIC

the same subject, general location or people, understood to take
place in a long time period, weeks, months, years or even
billions or trillions of years. (HCOB 15 May 63) See also CHAIN.

CHANGE, 1. a shift of location in space. (SH Spec 4, 6105C26) 2.
essentially the redirection of energy. When change is too rapid
or too slow both beingness and havingness suffer. (Sen 8-8008,
p. 103)

CHANGE OF CHARACTERISTIC, 1. one of the ten main needle
actions of an E-meter. A change of characteristic occurs when
we hit on something in the preclear’s bank. It occurs only when
and each time we ask that exact question. As the question or
item alone changes the needle pattern, we must assume that |
that is it and we use it. It is not much used but must be known.
(EME, pp. 15-16) 2. the meter on a certain question has its
needle shift into a different action than it was in. It resumes its
old action when you no longer ask the question. (SH Spec 1,
6105C07)

!
| ii «fo Chain

65
CHANGE OF SPACE PROCESSING

CHANGE OF SPACE PROCESSING, the object of change of
space processing is to get all areas into present time. Originally
it could be conceived that only the place where the preclear is is
in present time, that all other places are in past time to the
degree that they are far from the preclear. Change of space
processing is done in this fashion: “Be at the place where you
entered the mest universe,” “Be at the center of this room,” “Be
at the place where you entered the mest universe,” “Center of
this room,” “Entrance point,” “Room” and so forth until the
entrance point is in present time. The preclear should be made
to run change of space on any area until that area is in present
time. (COHA, p. 38)

CHANGE OF VIEWPOINT, the primary requisite of the view-
point is that it has position relative to points. A change of
viewpoint necessitates a change of positions rather than a
change of idea. The change of position is primary; the change of
idea is secondary. (PAB 8)

CHANGE PROCESSES, 1. resistance to change prevents the pe
from having, and as the ideas of change are sorted out the pc
has increased havingness. (HCOB 27 Apr 61) 2. if a pe is bad off
on change (which includes about eighty per cent of the pcs you
get), he cannot run another auditing command cleanly as he
never really runs the command but runs something else.
Therefore the only thing that can be run is a change process and
it must be run until motion is removed from the tone arm. There
are many, many versions of change. To get the best result,
adapt a process to the pc. (HCOB 27 Apr 61)

CHAOS, 1. all points in motion—no points fixed. (5410CM07) 2.
there’s nothing traveling in one direction and there’s nothing in
alignment. (PDC 59)

CHAOS MERCHANT, the slave master, the fellow who’s trying
to hold everybody down, the fellow who's trying to keep
everybody shook up one way or the other and so he can’t ever
get up again, the fellow who makes his money and his daily
bread out of how terrible everything is. (SH Spee 328, 6312C10)
See also MERCHANTS OF CHAOS.

66
CHECKLIST

CHARGE, 1. harmful energy or force accumulated and stored
within the reactive mind, resulting from the conflicts and
unpleasant experiences that a person has had. Auditing dis-
charges this charge so that it is no longer there to affect the
individual. (Sez AD) 2. the electrical impulse on the case that
activates the meter. (HCOB 27 May 70) 3. stored energy or
stored recreatable potentials of energy. (HCOB 8 Jun 68) 4. the
stored quantities of energy in the time track. It is the sole thing
that is being relieved or removed by the auditor from the time
track. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen VI Part One Tone Arm Action) 5.
emotional charge or energy. (NSOL, p. 29) 6. the accumulation
of entheta in locks and secondaries which charges up the
engrams and gives them their force to aberrate. (SOS Gloss) 7.
by charge is meant anger, fear, grief, or apathy contained as
misemotion in the case. (SOS, p. 108) See also CHRONIC
CHARGE.

CHARGE UP, charge that is restimulated but not released causes
the case to “charge up” in that charge already on the time track
is triggered but is not yet viewed by the pce. (HCOB 8 Jun 63)

CHARGED UP, the key-in and additional locks begin to give the
engram more and more entheta, and it becomes more and more
" powerful in its effect upon the individual. It has to be, in short,
charged up in order to affect the individual. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 137)

CHART OF ATTITUDES, 1. a chart on which are plotted with
the numerical values of the emotional tone scale the gradient
attitudes that fall between the highest and lowest states of
consideration about life. Example: top-CAUSE; bottom-FULL
EFFECT. (PXZ Gloss) 2. a chart of attitudes toward life. This
might be called a “button chart” for it contains the major
difficulties people have. It is also a self-evaluation chart. You
can find a level on it where you agree and that is your level of
reaction toward life. (HF'P, p. 38)

CHC, Clean Hands Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

CHECKLIST, a list of actions or inspections to ready an activity
or machinery or object for use or estimate the needful repairs or
corrections. This is erroneously sometimes called a “checksheet”
but that word is reserved for study steps. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

67
CHECKOUT

CHECKOUT, the action of verifying a student’s knowledge of an
item given on a checksheet. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

CHECKSHEET, a list of materials, often divided into sections,
that give the theory and practical steps which, when completed,
give one a study completion. The items are selected to add up to
the required knowledge of the subject. They are arranged in the
sequence necessary to a gradient of increasing knowledge on the
subject. After each item there is a place for the initial of the
student or the person checking the student out. When the
checksheet is fully initialed, it is complete, meaning the student
may now take an exam and be granted the award for comple-
tion. Some checksheets are required to be gone through twice
before completion is granted. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III) Abbr.
c/sheet or ch. sheet or Vsht.

CHECKSHEET MATERIAL, the policy letters, bulletins, tapes,
mimeo issues, any reference book or any books mentioned on
the checksheet. (HCO PL 16 Mar 71)

CHEMICAL RELEASE, drugs (or alcohol) give an enforced
moment or period of release. It is surrounded in mass. They are
deadly because they give the sensation of release while actually
pulling in mass. (HCOB 23 Sept 68)

CHEW AROUND, tendency on the part of preclears to change the
direction or position of the energy masses which they are
handling, and when this is the case there is a certain loss of
havingness by reason of heat and friction. (PAB 52)

CHEW ENERGY, Siang. just “chewing the energy around”
doesn’t make it persist, but, with all this chewing he isn’t
as-ising anything. All he is doing is moving mass “A” to position
“B.” Anybody who is doing this gets no cognition out of it at all.
He is waiting for that piece of energy to tell him something, and
this tells you a great deal about the preclear who couldn’t run an
engram. He was waiting for the MEST to say something. (PAB
56)

CHKSHT, checksheet. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

CHRONIC CHARGE, the impulse to withdraw from that which
can’t be withdrawn from or to approach that which can’t be
approached, and this, like a two pole battery, generates current.

68
CIRCUIT

This constantly generated current is chronic charge. (HCOB 15
May 63)

CHRONIC ENGRAM, an engram which has been more or less
continuously restimulated so that it has become an apparent
portion of the individual. (DTOT, p. 45)

CHRONIC HIGH TA, one which is found high two sessions
running (consecutive). “High” means around 4.0 or above. But
3.8 can also be called “high” if it occurs at session beginning too
often. (HCOB 13 Feb 70) See also HIGH TA.

CHRONIC INSANITY, 1. an acute insanity with the time factor
lengthily extended. (DASF) 2. one which, having appeared, does
not subside but holds the individual in an abnormal state.
(DASF)

CHRONIC SOMATIC, 1. a stuck moment on a time track, which is
the stable datum of a prior confusion. (SH Spee 61, 6110C03) 2.
an obvious demonstration of a help-failure cycle where the
individual has used an effort to help and has failed and has
gotten a somatic back. (5112CM30A) 3. psychosomatic illness, as
it is called in the field of medicine, is named in Dn a chronic
somatic, since it is not an illness, and cannot be diagnosed as
such but is only some former pain which is in restimulation.
(SOS, p. xv) 4. a psychosomatic illness, since it is discovered
that psychosomatic illness is only the restimulated somatic of
some engram and goes away when the engram is contacted and
reduced or erased. (SOS, p. 26) 5. simply an area of randomity,
a theta facsimile of past pain, effort, counter-effort, that has
swamped the individual. It throws him all out of whack. As far
_as atoms and molecules are concerned, he suffers pain.
(5109CM24B)

CHUG, a needle reaction in which the needle in falling appears to
encounter, penetrate and surge beyond a “skin.” (HCOB 13 Apr
64, Sen VI Part One Glossary of Terms)

CIRCUIT, 1. a part of an individual’s bank that behaves as though
it were someone or something separate from him and that
either talks to him or goes into action of its own accord, and may
even, if severe enough, take control of him while it operates.

69
CIRCUIT CASES

A tune that keeps going around in someone’s head is an example
of a circuit. (VOTL Gloss) 2. just an identity that is so dom-
inant that it balls up a whole section of the whole track. It
takes a large section of the whole track and bundles it all up in
a black ball and it’s full of pictures. (SH Spec 105, 6201025) 3. a
circuit has no livingness in it. It is simply a motivated mass. (SH
Spec 21, 6106C27) 4. matter, energy, space and time at a mental
level, enclosing thought. (6009C13) 5. a mechanism which
becomes an identity in itself, with its own “I” which takes a
piece of the analyzer, walls it off with the charge, and thereafter
dictates to the preclear. In olden times, these were called
demons. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 202) 6. divisions of your own mind that
seem to make up other personalities and these other personal-
ities affect you and argue with you and so forth. (5203CM05D)

CIRCUIT CASES, the auditor will encounter many cases which
resolve very rapidly. These account for fully 50% of the people
who come to him, but he will also encounter many people whose
cases are resistive and he will encounter a small handful who
wouldn't let anything happen if the auditor used a shotgun on
them. These are classified as “circuit cases.” (PAB 19)

CIRCUITRY, 1. consists of “you” phrases. They are the phrases
addressed from an exterior “I” to “you.” “I have to tell you” is
still a “you” addressing the “I.” These phrases are received from
persons who seek to nullify the independence of judgment of
others. (NOTL, p. 49) 2. circuitry is an escape from knowing. It
is knowingness in a substitute for lack of knowing. When a
thetan escapes from knowing, he sets up a circuit. (SH Spec 68,
6110C18)

CLASS, 1. refers to the level of classification of an auditor. (BTB
12 Apr 72) 2. a technical certificate in Sen goes by classes on the
gradation chart. (HCO PL 13 Mar 66) Abbr. Cl.

CLASS 0, see HRS.
CLASS I, see HTS.
CLASS Il, see HCA.
CLASS III, see HPA.
CLASS IV, see HAA.
70
CLASSIFICATION

CLASS V, see HVA.
CLASS VI, see HSS.
CLASS VII, see HGA.
CLASS VIII, see HSTS.

CLASS VII C/S-6, list useful in running out past bad auditing.
(HCOB 28 Mar 74)

CLASS VIII DRUG RUNDOWN, one of the steps in a complete
drug rundown. It consists of listing and rehabbing all drugs,
3-way recalls, secondaries, and engrams of taking and giving
drugs. (HCOB 31 Aug 74)

CLASS IX, Hubbard Advanced Technical Specialist. The Class IX
Course is taugnt at Saint Hill organizations and contains data
concerning advanced procedures and developments since Class
VIII. (CG&AC 75)

CLASS X, an advanced Sen course available only on Flag. It
teaches L-10 OT, an upper level rundown whose basic tech
comes from research into increasing OT powers. (CG&AC 75)

CLASS XI, an advanced Sen Course, available to Sea Org auditors
only and is taught on Flag. It teaches L-11, the New Life
Rundown and L-11X, the New Life Expansion Rundown.
(CG&AC 75)

CLASS XII, an advanced Sen course available to Sea Org auditors
only and is taught on Flag. It teaches L-12, the Flag OT
executive Rundown. (CG&AC 75)

CLASS CHART, see CLASSIFICATION GRADATION AND
AWARENESS CHART.

CLASSIFICATION, 1. classification means that we require cer-
tain actions to have been done or conditions to have been
attained before an individual is classified on that level and we let
him go on. (Aud 107 ASHO) 2. an award earned by an auditor
that entitles him to audit certain levels of processes, and that
shows that he has attained the ability and skill to do so by actual
test. (Sen AD)

71
CLASSIFICATION COURSE

CLASSIFICATION COURSE, the practical drills and student
auditing portion of an auditor training course. After completion
of the classification course the auditor is classified to that level
and may audit pes professionally on the processes of that level.
(PRD Gloss)

CLASSIFICATION EXAM, this is a practical exam. The test
consists of a checkout of TR-4, any of the meter drills of the
level, and the auditing of a doll on the process or processes of
that level with full TRs and admin. (FO 1685)

CLASSIFICATION GRADATION AND AWARENESS CHART,
the route to Clear, the Bridge. On the right side of the chart
there are various steps called the states of release. The
left-hand side of the chart describes the very important steps of
training on which one gains the knowledge and abilities neces-
sary to deliver the grades of release to another. It is a guide for
the individual from the point where he first becomes dimly
aware of a Scientologist or Scn and shows him how and where
he should move up in order to make it. Sen contains the entire
map for getting the individual through all the various points on
this gradation scale and for getting him across the Bridge to a
higher state of existence. (Aud 107 ASHO)

Clay Demo

CLAY DEMO, abbreviation for clay demonstration. A Scn study
technique whereby the student demonstrates definitions, prin-
ciples, etc. in clay to obtain greater understanding by translat-
ing significance into actual mass. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

72
CLAY TABLE PROCESSING

CLAY TABLE, a clay table is any platform at which a student,
standing or sitting, can work comfortably. The surface must be
smooth. A table built of rough timber will serve but the top
surface where the work is done should be oil cloth or linoleum.
Otherwise the clay sticks to it and it cannot be cleaned and will
soon lead to an inability to see clearly what is being done
because it is stained with clay leavings. (HCOB 10 Dec 70 I)

CLAY TABLE CLEARING, 1. a process of clearing words and
symbols. (HCOB 9 Sept 64) 2. as one Sen remedy for increased
IQ and destimulation, clay table clearing is audited by an auditor
in a session. The entire effort by the auditor in a session of clay
table clearing is to help the pe regain confidence in being able to
achieve things by removing the misunderstandings which have
prevented that achievement. (HCOB 18 Aug 64)

CLAY TABLE HEALING, gets the pc to name the condition the
pe requires to be handled and gets the pc to represent this in
clay. The whole process is flat when the condition has vanished.
Clay table healing is a very precise series of actions. (HCOB 9
Sept 64) [The above is a very brief summary only. The full
series of steps can be found in the referenced HCOB.] Abbr.
CTH.

CLAY TABLE IQ PROCESSING, 1. trace back (with no meter)
what word or term the pe failed to grasp in the subject chosen.
Get the pc to make up the mass represented by the word in clay
and any related masses. Get them all labeled and explained. I.Q.
(intelligence quotient or the relative brightness of the individ-
ual) can be rocketed out of sight with HGC use of a clay table.
(HCOB 17 Aug 64) 2. the original issue of “Clay Table Clearing”
was called “Clay Table I.Q. Processing.” (HCOB 27 Sept 64)

CLAY TABLE PROCESSING, 1. the clay table presents us with a
new series of processes. The preclear is made to make in clay
and labels whatever he .or she is currently worried about or
hasn’t understood in life. The essence of clay table processing is
to get the pc to work it out. In auditing the pc tells the auditor.
This is still true in clay table processing. (HCOB 17 Aug 64) 2.
the pe handles the mass. The auditor does not suggest subjects
or colors or forms. The auditor just finds out what should be

73
CLAY TABLE TRACK ANALYSIS

made and tells the pc to do it in clay and labels. And keeps
calling for related objects to be done in clay. (HCOB 17 Aug 64)

CLAY TABLE TRACK ANALYSIS, a training activity for Class
VI. (HCOB 18 Aug 64)

CLAY TABLE TRAINING, the student is given a word or
auditing action or situation to demonstrate. He then does this in
clay. (HCOB 11 Oct 67)

CLEAN HANDS, in order for an auditor who is regarded as a
security risk to be considered to have clean hands, it is
necessary for him to receive a Clean Hands Clearance Check
from HCO. If on completion there are questions which are alive
or if there are any missed or partial withholds the person must
go back to the HGC to have them cleaned up before he is
considered to have clean hands. If no questions are alive and
there are no missed or partial withholds, then the person will be
awarded a Clean Hands seal on his certificate and will be
considered to be in good standing with HCO. (HCO PL 27 Feb
62)

CLEANING A CLEAN, 1. attempting to clean up or deal with
something that has already been cleaned up or dealt with or that
wasn’t troublesome to the person in the first place. (Sen AD) 2.
there is nothing there yet the auditor tries to get it and the pc
ARC breaks. This is cleaning a clean with an E-meter. (HCO PL
16 Apr 65) 3. this is the same as asking a pe for something that
isn’t there and develops a “withhold of nothing.” (HCOB 13 Apr
64, Sen VI Part One Tone Arm Action)

CLEAN NEEDLHE, 1. a needle that acts when the auditor speaks
and does nothing the rest of the time. (EMD, p. 42) 2. it is a
total uniform speed. There is not the faintest tick in it. There is
not the faintest speed-up. There is nothing. It is just like
molasses pouring out of the barrel—and there it is, and that’s a
clean needle. (SH Spec 224, 6212C13) 3. one which flows,
producing no pattern or erratic motions of the smallest kind
with the auditor sitting looking at it and doing nothing. A clean
needle is not just something that doesn’t react to a particular
question. It’s a lovely slow flow, usually a rise, most beautifully
expressed on a Mark V at 64 sensitivity. (HCOB 30 Dec 62)

74
CLEAR

CLEAR, n. 1. a thetan who can be at cause knowingly and at will
over mental matter, energy, space and time as regards the first
dynamic (survival for self). The state of Clear is above the release
grades (all of which are requisite to clearing) and is attained by
completion of the Clearing Course at an Advanced Organization.
(Sen AD) 2. a Clear, in an absolute sense, would be someone who
could confront anything and everything in the past, present and
future. (Abil Mi 256) 3. a Clear is not an all-knowing being. A
Clear is somebody who has lost the mass, energy, space and
time connected with the thing called mind. (SH Spec 80,
6609C08) 4. a picture is completely unnecessary for any kind of a
recall at all which is probably about the only change there has
been from the definition of a Book One Clear. (SH Spec 59,
6504C27) 5. a Clear has no vicious reactive mind and operates at
total mental capacity just like the first book (DMSMH) said. In
fact every early definition of Clear is found to be correct. (HCOB
2 Apr 65) 6. the name of a button on an adding machine. When
you push it, all the hidden answers in the machine clear and the
machine can be used for a proper computation. So long as the
button is not pressed the machine adds all old answers to all new

. efforts to compute and wrong answers result. Really, that’s all a
Clear is. Clears are beings who have been cleared of wrong
answers or useless answers which keep them from living or
thinking. (Aud 4 UK) 7. a Clear has risen from the analogy
between the mind and the computing machine. Before a com-
puter can be used to solve a problem, it must be cleared of old
problems, of old data and conclusions. Otherwise, it will add all
the old conclusions into the new one and produce an invalid
answer. Processing clears more and more of these problems
from the computer. The completely cleared individual would
have all his self-determinism in present time and would be
completely self-determined. (Abid 114A) 8. a thetan cleared of
enforced and unwanted behavior patterns and discomforts.
(HCOB 8 May 63) 9. simply an awareness of awareness unit which
knows it’s an awareness of awareness unit, can create energy at
will, and can handle and control, erase or re-create an analytical
mind or reactive mind. (Dn 55/, pp. 17-18) 10. a person who can
have or not have at will anything in the universe. (5412CM06) 11.
an unaberrated person. He is rational in that he forms the best
possible solutions he can on the data he has and from his

75
CLEARED CANNIBAL

viewpoint. He obtains the maximum pleasure for the organism,
present and future, as well as for the subjects along the other
dynamics. The Clear has no engrams which can be restimulated
to throw out the correctness of computation by entering hidden
and false data in it. (DMSMH, p. 111) 12. one who has become
the basic individual through auditing. (DTOT, p. 33) —v. 1. te
clear: to release all the physical pain and painful emotion from
the life of an individual. (DMSMH, p. 170)

CLEARED CANNIBAL, the individual without engrams seeks
survival along all of the dynamics in accordance with his breadth
of understanding. This does not mean that a Zulu who has been
cleared of all his engrams would not continue to eat missionaries
if he were a cannibal by education; but it does mean that he
would be as rational as possible about eating missionaries;
further, it. would be easier to re-educate him about eating
missionaries if he were a Clear. (SOS, p. 110)

CLEARED THETA CLEAR, 1. a person who is able to create his
own universe; or, living in the mest universe is able to create
illusions perceivable by others at will, to handle mest universe
objects without mechanical means and to have and feel no need
of bodies or even the mest universe to keep himself and his
friends interested in existence. (Sen 8-8008, p. 114) 2. next level
above theta clear (which is cleared of need to have a body). All
of a person’s engrams have been turned into conceptual exper-
ience. He is clear all the way along the track. He can really
deliver the horsepower. (5206CM26A) 3. one who has full recall
of everything and full ability as a thetan. (Scz 8-80, p. 59)

CLEARING, 1. a gradient process of finding places where
attention is fixed and restoring the ability of the pe to place and
remove attention under his own determinism. (HCOB 28 Feb 59)
2. what is clearing but regaining awareness that one is himself,
and regaining confidence. (HCOB 1 Feb 58)

CLEARING COMMANDS, 1. when running a process newly or
whenever the preclear is confused about the meaning of the
commands, clear the commands with the preclear, using the
dictionary if necessary. The auditor reads the commands one at
a time to the pe and asks the pe “What does this command mean

76
CLOSURE MECHANISM

to you?” (HCOB 14 Nov 65) 2. clear the commands (or questions
or list items) by first clearing in turn each word in backwards
sequence of the words in the command. (e.g. if command is “Do
fish swim?” clear “swim” then “fish” then “do.”) This prevents
the pe starting to run the process by himself while you are still
clearing the words. (BTB 2 May 72R)

CLEAR MOCKERY, a condition in which the thetan thinks of
himself as dead. If you just ask him, “How could you help me?”
although he is sitting here at 3 on the dial, there is no action on
the needle. The needle is stiff. He is all machine motivated.
You'll find in his normal course of endeavor he has all kinds of
bad luck. He doesn’t quite groove in but basically this: he
doesn’t believe anything can be done. No help, no doingness.
(SH Spec 1, 6105C07)

CLEAR OT, our definition of an operating thetan is that of a Clear
Operating Thetan. This is a proofed-up being who no longer has
a bank, and who has experience. This is a completely stable
state—a being who won't hit the banana peel. (SH Spec 82,
6611C29)

CLEAR READ, when a preclear is Clear he may occasionally get
some tone arm motion due to purely body electronics but in the
main reads at male or female on the tone arm (3 or 2) according
to his or her sex. (EME, p. 11)

CLEAR THINKING, a Clear does not have any “mental voices.”
He does not think vocally. He thinks without articulation of his
thoughts and his thoughts are not in voice terms. He thinks at
such speed that the word stream of consciousness would be left
at the post. (DMSMH, p. 87)

CLOSED TERMINALS, when one begins to identify, one has
“closed terminals” too closely, and believes one terminal is
another terminal. (PAB 63) See also SNAPPING TERMINALS.

CLOSURE MECHANISM (of problems), problems close in on one
as an actual mental mass when one invents solutions for them.
The solution is not the problem so does not as-is or erase. When
one invents problems or conceives of problems as simply
problems, the mental mass moves away from him in space. This

77
COACH

can be demonstrated to a pe (who can see mental mass) by
having him invent some solutions. A mental mass will move in
on him. But when he invents problems the mental mass moves
away. See HCOB 11 June 57, page 6. In considerable use in 1955
in London. (LRH Def. Notes)

COACH, to train intensively by instruction, demonstration and
practice. In training drills, one twin is made the coach and the
other the student. The coach in his coaching actions, coaches the
student to achieve the purpose of the drill. He coaches with
reality and intention following exactly the materials pertaining
to the drill to get the student through it. When this is achieved
the roles are then reversed—the student becoming the coach
and the coach becoming the student. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

-CO-AUDIT, n. a team of any two people who are helping each
other reach a better life with Sen processing. (Abil 155)

CO-AUDITING, is an abbreviation for cooperative auditing. It
means a team of any two people who are helping each other
reach a better life with Scn processing. (Aud 90 UK)

CO-AUDITING TEAM, where two people audit each other
alternately. There is also the three-way team, in which three
people co-audit. This has the advantage of keeping altitude for
each auditor, since in the triangle, none is being processed by
anyone he is auditing. (SOS, Bk. 2, pp. 266-267)

CO-AUDITOR, one who audits another co-auditor under super-
vision and after training at a given level. (Aud 2 UK)

CODE, collection of rules (do’s and don'ts). (BTB 30 Sept 71 IV)

CODE OF A SCIENTOLOGIST, the Code of a Scientologist was
evolved to safeguard Scientologists in general, and is subscribed
to by leading Scientologists. (COHA, p. 7)

CODE OF HONOR, I. the ethical code of Scn; the code one uses,
not because he has to, but because he can afford such a luxury.
(COHA Gloss) 2. the Code of Honor clearly states conditions of
acceptable comradeship amongst those fighting on one side
against something which they conceive should be remedied.
Anyone practicing the Code of Honor would maintain a good
opinion of his fellows, a much more important thing, than having
one’s fellows maintain a good opinion of one. (PAB 40)

78
COMATIC REDUCTION

COFFEE GRINDER, an alternate name for Facsimile One. (HOM,
p. 64) See FACSIMILE ONE.

COF, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: HCO City
Offices and all their field Auditors, HCO Franchises, central
organizations, HCO Area, continental and HCO WW. (HCO PL
22 May 59)

COFFEE SHOP AUDITING, 1. out of session auditing of some-
one. (HCOB 20 Apr 72 II) 2. meterless fool-around, often by
students, stirring up cases. (HCOB 8 Mar 71)

COFFIN CASE, a preclear who lies in the position of a dead man,
with arms folded. This is a grief engram having to do with the
death of some loved one, and with the preclear in the valence of
the loved one. (SOS, p. 112) See also CORPSE CASE.

COG, cognition. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

COGNITING, as-ising aberration with a realization about life.
(HCOB 26 Apr 71 I)

COGNITION, 1. as-ising aberration with a realization about life.
(HCOB 26 Apr 71 I) 2. a pe origination indicating he has “Come
to realize.” It’s a “What do you know, 1. . .” statement. (HCOB
14 May 69 II) 3. something a pe suddenly understands or feels.
“Well, what do you know about that?” (HCOB 25 Feb 60) Abbr.
Cog.

COGNITION SURGE, a release of electrical charge. It goes along
with the person having a cognition. (SH Spec 9, 6106C07)

COLD, an extreme stillness. (SH Spec 56, 6109C20)

COLOR-VISIO AND TONE-AUDIO, when a person can imagine
in terms of color motion pictures with sound. (Exp Jour,
Winter-Spring 50)

COMANOME, 1. once upon a time, engrams were called coma-
nomes. (5009CM23B) 2. a period of unconsciousness which

contained physical pain and apparent antagonism to the survival
of the individual. (Exp Jour, Winter-Spring 1950) See ENGRAM.

COMATIC REDUCTION, boil-off was originally and sedately
named comatic reduction but such erudition has been outvoted by

79
COMBINATION VALENCE

the fact that it has never been used. (DMSMH, p. 303) See
BOIL-OFF.

COMBINATION VALENCE, one which has all the characteristics
of the terminal and oppterm. (SH Spec 105, 6201C25)

COMBINED TERMINAL, an item or identity the pe has both
been and opposed produces therefore both pain and sensation
when it is “late on the track,” which is to say, after the fact of
many terminals and opposition terminals. The combination
terminal is the closure between terminal and opposition terminal
lines which possesses attributes of both and the clarity of
neither. It signifies a period toward the end of a game. It is
found most commonly when the pe’s case is only shallowly
entered. They exist on all cases but are fewer than terminals
and opposition terminals. Symbol. COTERM. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

COME ALIVE, on a second or third assessment items which were
at first null or reading poorly will be found to come alive and
read well. The pc by being audited has had an increase of ability
to confront. The result is that items beyond his reach previously
(and did not read well) are now available and can be run easily.
(HCOB 29 Apr 69)

COMM, communication. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

COMMAND PHRASES, statements that group, bounce or deny.
(HCOB 15 May 68) See ACTION PHRASES.

COMMAND POSTS, 1. control centers. (5110CM11B) 2. epi-
centers which stand along the nerve channels of the body and
are like switchboards. (HOM, p. 25) ,

COMMAND SOMATIC, a somatic brought from a different part of
the time track by some command phrase, such as “My arm
hurts.” The preclear may have this somatic while running a
prenatal engram although he was only three days conceived in
the incident. Command somatics occur where the preclear is out
of valence. (SOS Gloss)

COMM COURSE, because the H.A.S. Course is a course about
communication it is often called the Comm Course. (HCO PL 15
Apr 71R) See H.A.S. COURSE.

80
COMMUNICATION

COMM CYCLE, communication cycle. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

COMMENT, a statement or remark aimed only at the student or
the room. (HCOB 16 Aug 71 II)

COMM LAG, communication lag. (A bil SW)
COMM LINE, see COMMUNICATION LINE.

ZY
pe

COMMUNICATION, 1. the consideration and action of impelling
an impulse or particle from source point across a distance to
receipt point with the intention of bringing into being at the
receipt point a duplication and understanding of that which
emanated from the source point. (HCOB 5 Apr 73) 2. the first
and most basic definition of any part of communication is that
communication or any part thereof is a consideration. As
duplication is a consideration, communication is possible to the
degree that the preclear can freely make considerations.
(COHA, pp. 170-171) 3. the operation, the action, by which one
experiences emotion and by which one agrees. Communication is
not only the modus operandi, it is the heart of life and is by
thousands of per cent the senior in importance to affinity and
reality. (PAB 1) 4. any ritual by which effects can be produced
and perceived. Thus a letter, a bullet, the output of theta
“flitter” are all, to us, communication. (PAB 4) 5. the ability to
translate sympathy or some component of sympathy from one
terminal to another terminal. (Spr Lect 5, 5303CM25) 6. an
interchange of energy from one beingness to another in the
thetan, and in Homo sapiens, communication is known as
perception. (Sen 8-8008, p. 21) 7. the handling of particles, of

81
COMMUNICATION BRIDGE

motion. (PAB 1) 8. the interchange of perception through the
material universe between organisms or the perception of the
material universe by sense channels. (Scn 0-8, p. 83) 9. the
interchange of ideas across space. (Scn 0-8, p. 36) 10. the use of
those sense channels with which the individual contacts the
physical universe. (DAB, Vol. II, p. 218)

COMMUNICATION BRIDGE, 1. it simply closes off the process
you were running, maintains ARC, and opens up the new
process on which you are about to embark. (PAB 151) 2. before
a question is asked, the preclear should have the question
discussed with him and the wording agreed upon as though he
were making a contract with the auditor. This is the first part of
a communication bridge. It precedes all questions but when one
is changing from one process to another the bridge becomes a
bridge indeed. (PAB 88) 3. the reason we use a communication
bridge is so a pe will not be startled by change, for if we change
too rapidly in a session, we stick the preclear in the session
every time. We give him some warning; and that is what a
communication bridge is for. (PAB 151)

COMMUNICATION CHANGE, by communication change we also
mean perception change. (PAB 1)

COMMUNICATION COURSE, 1. because the H.A.S. Course is a
course about communication, it is often called the Comm Course
(comm being for communication). (HCO PL 15 Apr 71R) 2. a
basic Scn course consisting mainly of the TRs; also called the
H.A.S. (Hubbard Apprentice Scientologist Course). (PRD Gloss)
See H.A.S. COURSE.

COMMUNICATION CYCLE, 1. a cycle of communication and
two-way communication are actually two different things. A
cycle of communication is not a two-way communication in its
entirety. In a cycle of communication we have Joe as the
originator of a communication addressed to Bill. We find Bill
receiving it and then Bill originating an answer or acknowl-
edgement back to Joe and thus ends the cycle. (Dn 55/, p. 82) 2.
consists of just cause, distance, effect with intention, attention,
duplication and understanding. (HCOB 23 May 1971R IV) Abor.
comm cycle.

82
COMMUNICATION LINE

COMMUNICATION FORMULA, 1. communication is the inter-
change of ideas or objects between two people or terminals.
(PXL Gloss) 2. the formula of communication is: Cause, Dis-
tance, Effect with Intention, Attention and Duplication with
Understanding. (HCOB 5 Apr 73)

COMMUNICATION LAG, the length of time intervening between
the asking of the question by the auditor and the reply to that
specific question by the preclear. The question must be precise;
the reply must be precisely to that question. It does not matter
what intervenes in the time between the asking of the question
and the receipt of the answer. The preclear may outflow,
jabber, discuss, pause, hedge, disperse, dither or be silent; no
matter what he does or how he does it, between the asking of
the question and the giving of the answer, the time is the
communication lag. The near answer, a guessing answer, an
undecided answer, are alike imprecise answers, and are not
adequate responses to the question. On receipt of such question-
able answers, the auditor must ask the question again. That he
asks the question again does not reduce the communication lag;
he is still operating from the moment he asked the question the
first time. And if he has to ask the question 20 or 30 times more
in the next hour in order to get a precise and adequate answer
from the preclear, the length of time of the lag would be from
the asking of the first question to the final receipt of the answer.
Near answers to the question are inadequate, and are, them-
selves, simply part of the communication lag. (PAB 43)

COMMUNICATION LAG INDEX, 1. the length of time it takes to
get a logical answer. (Spr Lect 3, 5803CM24) 2. the most
important method of telling whether or not a person is sick or
well. A person who answers quickly (and rationally) is in much
better condition than a person who answers after a long
consideration. (PAB 2)

COMMUNICATION LINE, 1. the route along which a communica-
tion travels from one person to another. (Sen AD) 2. any
sequence through which a message of any character may go.
(SOS, p. 94)

83
COMMUNICATION PROCESS

COMMUNICATION PROCESS, any process which places the
preclear at cause and uses communication as the principal
command phrase. (HCOB 7 Aug 59)

COMMUNICATION SCALE, refers to the individual’s ability to
communicate with other people (in relation to his position on the
tone scale). (NOTL, p. 103)

COMMUNICATIONS RELEASE, expanded Grade 0 release.
(CG&AC 75) See GRADE 0 RELEASE.

COMPARABLE MAGNITUDE, 1. similar importance. (PAB 126)
2. a datum can only be evaluated by comparison with another
datum of comparable magnitude. This means the basic unit must
therefore, be two. (SOS Gloss) Abbr. Comp Mag.

COMPARTMENTING THE QUESTION, 1. reading it word by
word and phrase by phrase to see if any one word or any one
phrase falls rather than the question as a whole. (HCOB 28 Sept
61) 2. using the prior reads occurring at the exact end of the
minor thoughts to dig up different data not related to the whole
thought. (HCOB 25 May 62)

COMPLETE, the reverse of quickie. To make whole, entire or
perfect; end after satisfying all demands or requirements.
(HCOB 19 Apr 72)

COMPLETE CASE, a case is not complete unless the lowest
incomplete grade chart action is complete and then each
completed in turn on up. (HCOB 26 Aug 70)

COMPLETE LIST, 1. a list which has only one reading item on
list. (HCOB 1 Aug 68) 2. any list listed for assessment that does
not produce a dirty needle while nulling or tiger drilling. (HCOB
12 Nov 62)

COMPLETION, 1. a completion is the completing of a specific
course or an auditing grade meaning it has been started, worked
through and has successfully ended with an award in Qual.
(HCOB 19 Jun 71 III) 2. a finished level or rundown. (HCO PL
29 Aug 71)

COMP MAG, comparable magnitude. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

84
COMPUTING PSYCHOTIC

COMPOSITE ILLNESS, an illness composed of many somatics.
(HCOB 19 Jul 69)

COMPULSION, 1. an engramic command that the organism must
do something. (DTOT, p. 58) 2. things pc feels compelled to do.
(BTB 24 Apr 69)

COMPULSIVE COMMUNICATION, an outflow which is not
pertinent to the surrounding terminals and situation. In other
words, compulsive communication is an outflow which is not in
reality with the existing reality. (Dn 55/, p. 93)

COMPULSIVE EXTERIORIZATION, a manifestation which we
call in Sen “doing a bunk,” in other words, running away. (Dn
55!, p. 136)

COMPUTATION, technically, that aberrated evaluation and pos-
tulate that one must be consistently in a certain state in order to
succeed. The computation thus may mean that one must
entertain in order to be alive or that one must be dignified in
order to succeed or that one must own much in order to live. A
computation is simply stated. It is always aberrated. A compu-
tation is as insidious as it pretends to align with survival. All
computations are nonsurvival. Computations are held in place
wholly to invalidate others. (AP&A, p. 41)

COMPUTATIONAL ALTITUDE, signifying that the individual
has an outstanding ability to think, to compute upon data.
Albert Einstein had computational altitude. (SOS Gloss)

COMPUTING PSYCHOTIC, 1. a psychotic who from his reac-
tivity figure-figures. He’s inconstant in his conduct, he’s compu-
tive. He figures it all out, he’s got explanations. His psychosis is
derived because these are crazy explanations. He’s obsessively
solving a problem that does not exist. (SH Spec 83, 6612C06) 2.
the computing psychotic passes quite commonly for a normal.
Here the individual is taking dictation solely from a facsimile of
some past moment of pain and is acting upon the advice of that
“circuit” and is calling it thought. The psychotic personality is
distinguished by its irrationality and its perversion of values.
The distinguishing characteristic of the computing psychotic is
his utter inability to change his mind. (AP&A, p. 38)

85
CONCENTRATION

CONCENTRATION, duration of a mock-up in present time. (Spr
Lect 4, 53038M24)

CONCEPT, 1. a high wave thought, above perception or reason or
single incidents. (Scn 8-80, p. 29) 2. that which is retained after
something has been perceived. (DMSMH, p. 46)

CONCEPT RUNNING, the preclear “gets the idea” of knowing or
not being and holds it, the while looking at his time track. The
concept runs out, or the somatic it brings on runs out, and the
concept itself is run. It is not addressed at individual incidents
but at hundreds. (Sen 8-80, p. 29)

CONCLUSION, the theta facsimiles of a group of combined data.
(Sen 0-8, p. 78)

CONDITION, 1. anything called for as a requirement before the
performance, completion or effectiveness of something else;
provision; stipulation. Anything essential to the existence or
occurrence of something else; external circumstances or factors.
Manner or state of being. Proper or healthy state. (HCOB 11 May
65) 2. a circumstance regarding a mass or terminal. (PAB 126)

CONDITIONS BY DYNAMICS, an ethics type action. Have the
person study the conditions formulas. Clear up the words
related to his dynamics one to eight, and what they are. Now
ask him what is his condition on the first dynamic. Have him
study the formulas. Don’t buy any glib-PR. When he’s com-
pletely sure of what his condition really is on the first dynamic
he will cognite. Similarly go on up each one of the dynamics until
you have a condition for each one. Continue to work this way.
Somewhere along the line he will start to change markedly.
(HCO PL 4 Apr 72) [The above is a brief summary only. The full
procedure will be found in the referenced HCO PL.]

CONDITIONS (ETHICS), in Sen the term also means the ethics
conditions (confusion,* treason, enemy, doubt, liability, non-
existence, danger, emergency, normal, affluence, power change,
power). The state or condition of any person, group or activity
can be plotted on this scale of conditions which shows the degree
of success or survival of that person, group or activity at any
time. Data on the application of these conditions is contained in

86
CONDITIONS OF EXISTENCE

the ethics policies and tapes of Sen. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) [*The
ethics condition of confusion came later than the date of this
BTB and is added here by the editor in order that all the current
ethics conditions are included. ]

CONDITION OF BEING, see CONDITIONS OF EXISTENCE.

Conditions of Existence

’

have

CONDITIONS OF EXISTENCE, there are three conditions of
existence. These three conditions comprise life. They are BE,
DO and HAVE. The condition of being is defined as the
assumption (choosing) of a category of identity. An example of
beingness could be one’s own name. Another example would be
one’s profession. The second condition of existence is doing. By
doing, we mean action, function, accomplishment, the attain-
ment of goals, the fulfilling of purpose, or any change of position

87
CONDUCT SURVIVAL PATTERN

in space. The third condition is havingness. By havingness we
mean owning, possessing, being capable of commanding, posi-
tioning, taking charge of objects, energies or spaces. These
three conditions are given in an order of seniority (importance)
where life is concerned. (FOT, pp. 26-27)

CONDUCT SURVIVAL PATTERN, the conduct survival pattern
is built upon the equation of the optimum solution. It is the basic
equation of all rational behavior and is the equation on which a
Clear functions. It is inherent in man. In other words, the best
solution to any problem is that which will bring the greatest
good to the greatest number of beings. (DMSMB&, p. 34)

CONF, conference. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

CONFESSION, a limited effort to relieve a person of the pressure
of his overt acts. (HCOB 21 Jan 60, Justification)

CONFESSIONAL, 1. sec checking done in session not for security
purposes is called a confessional. (HCOB 14 Oct 72) 2. modern
confessional is not earlier style security checking, this is new
tech. F/Ning every item, getting questions asked to F/N, not
some other question. (FBDL 245, 23 Nov 72) See also SECUR-
ITY CHECKING and INTEGRITY PROCESSING.

CONFESSIONAL AID (E-METER), the confessional aid assists
the minister in locating and relieving the spiritual travail of
individual parishioners in the Sen confessional. The confessional
aid does not diagnose or treat human ailments of body or mind,
nor does it affect the structure or any function of the body; its
use is directed as an article of faith of the Church of Scientology,
and was never intended for use outside of the Scientology
ministry. (HCO PL 9 Jul 69) See also E-METER.

CONFRONT, x. 1. an action of being able to face. (HCOB 4 Jan
78) 2. the ability to be there comfortably and perceive. (HCOB 2
Jun 71 I) 3. confront itself is a result and an end product. It
itself isn’t a doingness, it’s an ability. (SH Spec 21, 6106C27)
—v. to face without flinching or avoiding. (HCOB 4 Jan 73)

CONFRONTING, 1. the ability to be there comfortably and
perceive. (HCOB 2 Jun 71R-1) 2. the ability to front up to. (SH
Spec 84, 6612C13)

88
CONFUSION

Confront

CONFRONT PROCESS, 1. the confront process for a pc from the
Thirty-Six Presessions. The confront process gets the preclear
to present time from areas on the track where his attention was
fixed by an earlier process. (EME, p. 20) 2. it should move pe on
the track, going further into the past and easier and easier into
present time. Pc’s pictures should improve on a confront
process. (HCOB 23 Sept 60)

CONFUSION, 1. a confusion can be defined as any set of factors
or circumstances which do not seem to have any immediate
solution. More broadly, a confusion in this universe is random
motion. (POW, p. 21) 2. plus randomity. It means motion
unexpected above the tolerance level of the person viewing it.
(Abid 36) 3. a number of force vectors traveling in a numberof
different directions. (UPC 11) 4. a confusion consists of two
things, time and space; change of particles in, predicted or
unpredicted, and if they are unpredicted changes in space you
will have a confusion. (SH Spec 58, 6109C26)

Confusion (Def. 1)

89
CONNECTEDNESS

CONNECTEDNESS, the basic process on association of theta
with mest. All forms and kinds of association, including being
caught in traps, prone to become identifications as in Dn.
Connectedness puts the thetan at cause in making the mest (or
people when run outside) connect with him. (SCP, p. 28)

CONSCIOUS, when the analytical mind is fully in command of the
organism. (DMSMH, p. 59)

CONSCIOUSNESS, 1. awareness of now. (DTOT, p. 24) 2.
consciousness is awareness. Awareness itself is perception.
(2ACC-8B, 5311CM24)

Conservatism

CONSERVATISM, at 3.0 on the tone scale we have the person
who is democratic, but who is somewhat more conservative than
the liberal at 3.5 in his attitudes and more given to social
regulations, being more in need of them. (SOS, p. 124)

CONSIDER, think, believe, suppose, postulate. (PAB 82)

CONSIDERATION, 1. a thought, a postulate about something.
(BTB 1 Dec 71R IV) 2. a consideration is a continuing postulate.
(5702C26) 3. the highest capability of life, taking rank over the
mechanics of space, energy and time. (COHA Gloss)

90
CONTINUOUS MISSED WITHHOLD

CONSULTANT, an instructor who is on duty sporadically or
from time to time but not routinely in any one place. (HCOB 23
Apr 59)

CONT, continue (-d) (-ing), continental. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

CONTACT ASSIST, the patient is taken to the area where the
injury occurred and makes the injured member gently contact it
several times. A sudden pain will fly off and the injury if minor,
lessens or vanishes. This is a physical communication factor. The
body member seems to have withdrawn from that exact spot in
the physical universe. The restoration of awareness is often
necessary before healing can occur. The prolongation of a
chronic injury occurs in the absence of physical communication
with the affected area or with the location of the spot of injury
in the physical universe. (HCOB 2 Apr 69)

CONTAGION OF ABERRATION, 1. entheta, in proximity to
theta, makes entheta out of it. From this we have the contagion
of aberration. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 24) 2. people under stress, if
aberrated, dramatize engrams. Such dramatization may involve
the injury of another person and render him more or less
“unconscious.” The “unconscious” person then receives as an
engram the dramatization. (DMSMH, p. 134)

CONTAGION OF ERROR, on a course where the students audit
each other a contagion of error can occur. For example, student
A does a bad assessment on student B. Student B is then likely
to give a bad assessment to his next pe and you soon have a
whole rash of bad assessments. A similar phenomenon occurs
when students are permitted to get the answers to their queries
from other students. (HCOB 20 May 69)

CONTINUING OVERT ACT, continually committing overts
before, during and after processing. The person who is not
getting case gains is committing continuing overts. (HCOB 29
Sept 65 IT) .

CONTINUING OVERT CASE, who commits overts even when
being audited and between sessions. (HCOB 1 Jun 65)

CONTINUOUS MISSED WITHHOLD, a continuous missed with-
hold occurs when a person feels some way and anyone who sees
him misses it. Example: a doctor feels very unconfident of his

91
CONTINUOUS OVERT

skill. Every patient who sees him misses the fact that he is not
confident. This reacts as a missed withhold. It is of course based
upon some bad incident that destroyed his confidence (usually of
an engramic intensity). (HCOB 15 Dec 73)

CONTINUOUS OVERT, this is not quite the same as The
Continuing Overt Act, HCOB 29 Sept 65. In that type the
person is repeating overt acts against something usually named.
In the continuous overt a person who believes he is harmful to
others may also believe that many of his common ordinary
actions are harmful. He may feel he is committing a continuous
overt on others. Example: a clothing model believes she is
committing a fraud on older women by displaying clothing to
them in which they will look poorly. In her estimation this is a
continuous overt act. (HCOB 15 Dec 73)

CONTINUOUS OVERTS CASE, here’s one that commits antisocial
acts daily during auditing. He’s psychotic, he'll never get better,
case always hangs up. We can even solve that case. (HCOB 4
Apr 65)

CONTRA-SURVIVAL ENGRAM, 1. any kind of engram which
lies across the dynamics and has no alignment with purpose.
(DMSMH, p. 262) 2. a contra-survival engram contains physical
pain, painful emotions, all other perceptions and menace to the
organism. It contains apparent or actual antagonism to the
individual. (DMSMH, p. 62)

CONTROL, 1. you are stating a greater truth when you say that
control is predictable change than if you say control is start,
change and stop because start and stop are, of course, necessary
to change. You might say the thinking or philosophic definition
would be predictable change. (5703C10) 2. when we say control,
we simply mean willingness to start, stop and change. (Dn 55!,
p. 100) 3. positive postulating, which is intention, and the
execution thereof. (Scn 0-8, p. 36)

CONTROL CASE, 1. the case where control is obsessive or
other-determined, or where the individual is controlling things
out of compulsion or fear. (Dn 55/, p. 100) 2. the person who
feels he must be cold blooded in order to be rational is what is
called in Dianetics a “control case,” and on examination will be

92
CONTROL TRIO

found to be very far from as rational as he might be. People who
cannot experience emotion because of their aberrations are
ordinarily sick people. (SA, p. 94)

CONTROL CENTER, 1. the control center of the organism can be
defined as the contact point between theta and the physical
universe and is that center which is aware of being aware and
which has charge of and responsibility for the organism along all
its dynamics. (Scn 0-8, p. 84) 2. every mind may be considered
to have a control center. This could be called the “awareness of
awareness unit” of the mind, or it could be called simply “I”. The
control center is cause. It directs, through emotional relay
systems, the actions of the body and the environment. It is not a
physical thing. (HFP, p. 30)

CONTROL CIRCUIT, the control circuit may conduct itself as an
interior entity which takes the preclear out of the auditor’s
hands. When preclears are very hard to handle, take the bit in
their teeth and try to run their own cases despite anything the
auditor may do, they are running on control circuits, recorded
commands which make the preclear misbehave under auditing.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 204)

CONTROL-CONCEPT PROCESSING, you just get the concept of
“you can’t control it” and the concept that “you can control it.”
(5209CM04B)

CONTROL PROCESSES, processes which place the pe’s body and
actions under the auditor’s control to invite control of them by
the pe. (HCOB 29 Oct 57)

CONTROL TRANSFER, a specialized kind of transfer wherein
the thetan having devoted himself to a mest body now begins to
control the environment and other people for his body much as
he controls the body. (HOM, p. 78)

CONTROL TRIO, a three-stage process on a heavy spotting
control. It runs in this fashion. “Get the idea that you can have
that (object).” And when this is relatively flat, “Get the idea of
making that (object) remain where it is” (or continue where it is)
and “Get the idea of making that (object) disappear.” This is
actually a very fine process and undercuts (runs on a lower case
than) trio itself. (SCP, p. 22)

93
CONVERSATION

CONVERSATION, the process of alternating outflowing and
inflowing communication. (Dn 55/, p. 68)

COO, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: HCO City
Offices only, not to pe shown or given to HCO franchise holders
or field Auditors; also goes to central organizations, HCO Area,
HCO Cont, HCO WW. (HCO PL 22 May 59)

COPY, 7. 1. a duplicate, distinguished from a perfect duplicate, in
that it does not necessarily occupy the same space, same time,
nor use the same energies as the original. (COHA Gloss) 2. the
word “duplicate” is used, rather sloppily, to indicate a copy.
However, a copy is not a complete duplicate; a copy is a
facsimile. (COHA, p. 82) 3. something that a thetan on his own
volition simply made of an object in the physical universe with
full knowingness. (PXL, p. 65) —v. to make another one just
like it. (COHA, p. 34)

CORPSE CASE, a pc who would lie upon the couch with his arms
crossed neatly all ready for a lily and would always audit in this
fashion. The preclear is so fixed in a death that he is trying to
make everything unreal, and the only real thing, to him, would
be the unreality of death. (PAB 50) See also COFFIN CASE. °

CORRECTION LIST, 1. a list of prepared questions on a mimeod
sheet which is used by the auditor for the repair of a particular
situation, action, or rundown. (BTB 7 Nov 72 I) 2. the various
lists designed to find by-passed charge and repair a faulty
auditing action or life situation. (HCOB 28 May 70)

COTERM, combined terminal. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

COUNTER-CREATE, see CREATE-COUNTER-CREATE.

COUNTER-EFFORT, 1. the effort which counters one’s survival.
(5203CM06A) 2. any effort the environment can exert against
you. (5203CM04B) 3. what we're talking about when we talk
about a counter-effort is the force of impact of an engram. The
force of impact which gives the pc an engram is a counter-effort.
(5206CM25A)

COUNTER-EMOTION, any emotion that is countering an existing
emotion. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)

COUNTER-THOUGHT, you think one thing somebody else thinks
another. Their thought is counter to your thought. (HFP, p. 115)

94
COVERT HOSTILITY

COURAGE, the theta force necessary to overcome the obstacles
in surviving. (SOS, p. 189)

COURSE ADMINISTRATOR, the course staff member in charge
of the course materials and records. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

COURSE CHECKSHEET, see CHECKSHEET.

COURSE MATERIALS, in Sen and Dn course materials are
defined as those books, tapes, magazines, HCO Bulletins, HCO
Policy Letters and other authorized technical issues listed on the
checksheets of courses designed for use by the Church’s public.
(BTB 24 Nov 71 II)

COURSE SUP, course supervisor. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

COURSE SUPERVISOR, 1. the instructor in charge of a course
and its students. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III) 2. basically, someone
who in addition to his others duties can refer the person to the
exact bulletin to get his information and never tells him another
thing. (6905C29) Abbr. Crse Sup.

COURSE SUPERVISOR CORRECTION LIST, a correction list
designed to help locate the individual reasons a supervisor has
for not fully applying the study tech in supervision. (HCOB 27
Mar 72R II)

COVERT AUDITING, some students covertly audit. In “talking”
to someone they also seek to audit that person “without the
person knowing anything about it.” This of course is nonsense
since auditing results are best achieved in a session and a
session depends upon a self-determined agreement to be
audited. (HCOB 17 Oct 64 III)

COVERT HOSTILITY, around 1.1 on the tone scale we reach the
level of covert hostility. Here the hatred of the individual has
been socially and individually censured to a point where it has
been suppressed, and the individual no longer dares demon-
strate hate as such. He yet possesses sufficient energy to
express some feeling on the matter, and so what hatred he feels
comes forth covertly. All manner of subterfuges may be
resorted to. The person may claim to love others and to have the
good of others as his foremost interest; yet, at the same
moment, he works, unconsciously or otherwise, to injure or
destroy the lives and reputations of people and also to destroy
property. (SOS, p. 56)

95
CR

Covert Hostility

see definition on previous page

CR, cramming. (HCOB 16 Jun 71 III) [Replaced now by BTB 16
Jun 71RA III.]

CRAMMING, 1. a section in the Qualifications Division where a.
student is given high pressure instruction at his own cost after
being found slow in study or when failing his exams. (HCOB 19
Jun 71 III) 2. the cramming section teaches students what they
have missed. This includes trained auditors who wish to be
brought up-to-date on current technical developments. (HCO PL
13 May 69)

CRAMMING ORDER, 1. a cramming order is written to handle a
specific situation. If that is not handled, the situation will
worsen or change, thus the original cramming order will not
sufficiently handle if it is stale dated. (BTB 21 Jan 73R) 2. there
is a certain technology on how to write up a cramming order: (1)
isolate the exact outnesses in the folder; (2) order those HCOBs
or PLs crammed; (3) now look in a slightly wider circle around
the data flunked and get which basic is involved (i.e. Auditor
Code, TRs, metering, handling the session, handling the pe as a
being, etc.) and get that crammed, too. (BTB 12 Dec 71R)

CREAK, a stiffness, and out-of-plumbness, an unchanging situa-
tion, a no-energy flow. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen VI Part One
Glossary of Terms)

96
CRITICISM

CREATE, make, manufacture, construct, postulate, bring into
beingness. (FOT, p. 20)

CREATE-COUNTER-CREATE, to create something against a
creation, to create one thing and then create something else
against it. (POT, pp. 20-21)

CREATE-CREATE-CREATE, create again continuously one
moment after the next=SURVIVAL. (FOT, p. 20)

CREATIVE IMAGINATION, imagination, whereby in the field of
aesthetics the urges and impulses of the various dynamics are
interwoven into new scenes and ideas. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 101)

CREATIVE PROCESSING, 1. the exercise by which the pc is
actually putting up the physical universe. (SH Spec 52, 6502C23)
2. creative processing consists of having the preclear make, with
his own creative energies, a mock-up. (COHA Gloss)

CRIMINAL, 1. one who is unable to think of the other fellow,
unable to determine his own actions, unable to follow orders,
unable to make things grow, unable to determine the difference
between good and evil, unable to think at all on the future.
Anybody has some of these; the criminal has ALL of them.
(NSOL, p.78) 2. one who thinks help cannot be on any dynamic
or uses help on anyone to injure and destroy. (HCOB 28 May 60)
3. criminals are people who are frantically attempting to create
an effect long after they know they cannot. They cannot then
create decent effects, only violent effects. Neither can they
work. (FOT, pp. 31-32)

CRISS-CROSS, see 3DXX.

CRITICAL THOUGHT, 1. a symptom of an overt act having been
committed. (SH Spec 37, 6409C01) 2. a critical pc=a withhold
from the auditor. (HCOB 23 Aug 71)

CRITICISM, 1. most criticism is justification of having done an
overt. There are rightnesses and wrongnesses in conduct and
society and life at large, but random, carping 1.1 criticism when
not borne out in fact is only an effort to reduce the size of the
target of the overt. (HCOB 21 Jan 60, Justification) 2. a

97
CR0000-1

criticism is a hope that they can damage, and that’s what a
criticism is, with an inability to do so. (SH Spec 119, 6202C22)

CR0000-1, a drill to train the student to raise his awareness of the
condition of the pc called “Set up for a perfect session” drill.
(HCOB 16 Jun 71 III) An auditor must be able to see when a pe
has not eaten or slept, or what his tone level is, or is the pc
auditable. [This HCOB is cancelled and replaced by BTB 16 Jun
71RA III and the drill renamed “Ideal Session Start.”]

CR0000-2, a drill to train an auditor to increase session pace when
auditing a fast pe. Its name is Rapid TR-2. This is basically a
correction drill for auditors who tend to lose session control by
slow acknowledgements inviting endless itsa. (BTB 16 Jun 71R
II)

CR0000-3, an E-meter drill to train an auditor to confront an
E-meter. If a student has difficulty doing the preceding E-meter
drills, this drill is done. It is a gradient step towards greater
session control. The student confronts the E-meter and does
nothing else for two hours. (BTB 16 Jun 71R II)

CR0000-4, a drill to train an auditor to be able to see the pc, the
pe’s hands on the cans, the meter plus any reads, and the
worksheets without having to look at any one of them. The
auditor is trained to widen his/her vision until the auditor can
see the meter, the pc, the pc’s hands on the cans, and the
worksheets effortlessly. (BTB 16 Jun 71R II)

CR0000-5, E-meter trim check drill. A drill to train an auditor to
be able to do a trim check effortlessly in a session without
distracting the pc in any way. (BTB 16 Jun 71R II)

CROSS ENGRAM, an engram which embraces more than one
engram chain. The receipt of the cross engram, containing as it
does the convergence of two or more engram chains, is often
accompanied by a “nervous breakdown” or the sudden insanity
of an individual. A cross engram may occur in a severe accident,
in prolonged or severe illness under antagonistic circumstances,
or a nitrous oxide operation. (DTOT, p. 115)

CROSSOVER, 1. the area in the center of a GPM is the crossover.
This means the RI’s which cause the pc to become an opponent
of his own goal. (HCOB 4 Apr 63) 2. crossover means where the
individual ceases to be for the goal, and starts to be against the
goal. (SH Spec 329, 6312C12)

98
CTH

CRS, course. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

C/S, a case supervisor direction of what to audit on a pe. (HCOB
23 Aug 71)

C/S, 1. case supervisor. (HCOB 23 Aug 71) 2. commodore’s staff.
(BPL 5 Nov 72 RA)

CSC, Clearing Success Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

C/S 53, the basic list to get TA up or down into normal range.
Assessed M-5, reading items handled then reassessed etc. to
F/Ning assessment. Done well with good basic auditing this
action should not need to be frequently repeated on a case. TA
going high or low in later auditing after C/S 53 already fully
handled is normally handled with the correction list for that
action (e.g. L4BR when TA high after listing or WCCL on word
clearing, etc.). EP is C/S 53 F/Ning on assessment with TA in
normal range. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA) [This list has been revised a
number of times and its current number is C/S 58RJ.]

CS-5, Commodores Staff 5 Qualifications. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

CS-4, Commodores Staff 4 Training and Services. (BPL 5 Nov
72RA)

C/SHEET, also ch. sheet or /sht. Abbreviation for checksheet.
(BTB 12 Apr 72R)

C/SING IN THE CHAIR, the auditor may not C/S in the auditing
chair while auditing the pc. If he has no case supervisor he
writes the C/S before session and adheres to it in session. To do
something else and not follow the C/S is called C/Sing in the
chair and is very poor form as it leads to Q & A. (HCOB 23 Aug
71)

CS-1, 1. a general C/S which covers the basics of getting a pe
sessionable. The product is an educated pe who can run Sen or
Dn easily and get case gain. (BTB 8 Jan 71R) 2. purpose: to give
pes new to Dn or Sen and to give previously audited pcs as
needed, the necessary data and R-factor on basics and auditing
procedure so that he understands and is able and willing to be
audited successfully. (BTB 8 Jan 71R)

C/S-6, see CLASS VIII C/S-6.
CT, clay table. (HCOB 6 Nov 64)
CTH, clay table healing. (HCOB 27 Apr 65)

99
CULTURE

CULTURE, the pattern (if any) of life in the society. All factors of
the society, social educational, economic, etc., whether creative
or destructive. The culture might be said to be the theta body of
the society. (SOS Gloss)

CURVE, throw a curve means to give an unexpected contrary
datum. Also to shift reality. Curve itself is also the ordinary
dictionary meaning. (LRH Def. Notes)

CUTATIVE, an invented word to mean the impulse to shorten or
leave out or the thing left out. (HCO PL 26 Sept 70 III)

CUT COGNITION, you taking toc soon an F/N (F/N indicated at
the first twitch) you cut the cognition and leave by-passed
charge (a withheld cognition). (HCOB 14 Mar 71R)

CYCLE, 1. in Sen, a cycle just means from the beginning to the
conclusion of an intentional action. (Aud 39) 2. a span of time
with a beginning and an end=a section of the totality of time
with a beginning and an end=in beginningless and endless time
one can set out periods which do have a beginning and an end
insofar as action is concerned. (FOT, p. 19)

CYCLE OF ACTION, 1. the sequence that an action goes through,
wherein the action is started, is continued for as long as is
required and then is completed as planned. (Sen AD) 2. the
creation, growth, conservation, decay and death or destruction
of energy and matter in a space. Cycles of action produce time.
(PXL, p. 8) See also ACTUAL CYCLE OF ACTION.

CYCLE OF AN ORGANISM, the cycle of an organism, a group of
organisms or a species is inception, growth, re-creation, decay
and death. (HFP, p. 172)

CYCLE OF AN OVERT, it goes like this. (1) a being doesn’t get
the meaning of a word or symbol. (2) this causes the being to
misunderstand the area of the symbol or word (who used it,
whatever it applied to). (3) this causes the being to feel different
from or antagonized toward the user or whatever of the symbol
and so makes it all right to commit an overt. (4) having
committed the overt, the being now feels he has to have a
motivator and so feels caved in. This is the stuff of which Hades

100
CYCLIC PROCESS

is made. This is the trap. This is why people get sick. This is
stupidity and lack of ability. (HCOB 8 Sept 64)

CYCLE OF A UNIVERSE, could be said to be the cycle of
creation, growth, conservation, decay and destruction. This is
the cycle of an entire universe or any part of that universe. It is
also the cycle of life forms. (Sen 8-8008, p. 97)

CYCLE OF MIS-DEFINITION, (1) a person didn’t grasp a word,
then (2) didn’t understand a principle or theory, then (3) became
different from it, commits and committed overts against it, then
(4) restrained himself or was restrained from committing these
overts, then (5) being on a withhold (inflow) pulled in a
motivator. Not every word somebody didn’t grasp was followed
by a principle or theory. An overt was not committed every
time this happened. Not every overt committed was restrained.
So no motivator was pulled in. Every nattery or nonprogressing
student or pe is hung in the above 1,2,3,4,5 cycle. And every
such student or pc has a misdefined word at the bottom of that
pile. (HCOB 21 Feb 66)

CYCLE OF MOTION, go from a no change to a change to a no
change. (SH Spec 14, 6106C14)

CYCLE OF RANDOMITY, the cycle of randomity is from static,
through optimum, through randomity sufficiently repetitious or
similar to constitute another static. (HFP, p. 174)

CYCLE OF SURVIVAL, conception, growth, attainment, decay,
death, conception, growth, attainment, decay, death, over and
over again. (HFP, p. 20)

CYCLE OF THE ROCK, a person (1) failed to communicate
himself; (2) started using something to communicate with; (3)
put the last item on automatic and it created for him; (4) it
failed. The rock, itself, when first located will be a solution to
many earlier cycles as described above. And so, a rock is peeled
off cyele by cycle as above. (HCOB 29 Jul 58)

CYCLIC PROCESS, a repetitive process which causes the
preclear to cycle on the time track as in recall type processes.
(HCOB 29 Sept 65, Cyclical and Non-Cyclical Processes)

101
CYCLIC PSYCHOTIC

CYCLIC PSYCHOTIC, a psychotic who becomes completely
enturbulated during certain periods of the day, or of the week,
or of the month. This type is generally running on a time factor
contained in the engram. The incident may have occurred on the
twenty-fifth of the month and continued to the thirtieth of every
month. Or the incident may have occurred at ten o’clock at night
so the psychotic is only insane at ten o'clock every night. (SOS,
Bk. 2, p. 190)

102
DA, Dn Auditor. (Scn Jour Iss. 31-G)

DAC, Dianetic Auditor Course. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) [The course
teaching Dianetics prior to the Hubbard Standard Dianetics
Course (HSDC).]

DANGEROUS AUDITOR, 1. an auditor who consistently does
things that are upsetting to a pc’s case. (HCOB 12 Feb 66) 2. the
auditor who gets off safe withholds is dangerous and the auditor
who gets off unsafe withholds is safe. An auditor who will not
pull dangerous withholds from the pe is a dangerous auditor.
(SH Spec 113, 6202C20) 3. the auditor who is afraid to find out,
afraid to be startled, afraid to discover something, afraid of
what they will discover. This phobia prevents the “auditor” from
flattening anything. This makes missed withholds a certainty.
(HCOB 3 Mar 62)

DANGEROUS ENVIRONMENT, see SCIENTOLOGY ZERO.

DATA, consists of the postulates or assignment of value of
thetans; that’s data, that’s all data is. (15ACC-12, 5610C30)

DATA ALTITUDE, signifying that the individual has a fund of
knowledge gathered from books and records, or sometimes from
experience, with which others are not familiar. The college
professor has a data altitude. (SOS Gloss)

103
DATE FLASH

DATE FLASH, the auditor says to the preclear, “When I snap my
fingers, a date will flash. Give me the first response which
comes into your mind,” (snap!). The preclear then gives the first
date which comes into his mind. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 51)

DATE/LOCATE, a process to date and locate a flat point in a
process that appears overrun. (HCOB 24 Sept 71) Abbr. D/L.

DATUM, 1. a piece of knowledge, something known. Plural, data.
(BTB 4 Mar 65) 2. anything of which one could become aware,
whether the thing existed or whether he created it. (Sen 8-8008,
p. 6) 3. an invented, not a true, knowingness. (COHA, p. 151)
4. anything which proceeds from a postulate. (PDC 14) 5. a theta
facsimile of physical action. (Scn 0-8, p. 78) 6. a facsimile of
states of being, states of not being, actions or inactions,
conclusions, or suppositions in the physical or any other
universe. (Scn 0-8, p. 67)

DB, degraded being. (A bil 272)
DCG, see DIANETIC COUNSELING GROUP.
DD, Doctor of Divinity. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

DEAD BODY, physical universe matter, energy, space and time
minus life energy. (SA, p. 27)

DEAD HORSE, Slang. 1. a list which even with good auditing,
failed for any other reason to produce a reliable item. (HCOB 5
Dec 62) 2. if no slam occurs anywhere on a listing list with the
mid ruds in for the session, that’s a dead horse. (SH Spec 219,
6211C27) 3. an item listed from a non-reading question will give
you a dead horse (no item). (HCOB 1 Aug 68)

DEAD-IN-IS-EAD CASE, Slang. a case totally associating all
thought with mass. Thus he reads peculiarly on the meter. As
he is audited he frees his thinkingness so that he can think
without mass connotations. (HCOB 17 Mar 60)

DEAD LIST, null list. (HCOB 29 Jan 70)
DEADLY QUARTET, these processes are four in number. They

are designed as classes of processes to handle these four points:

104
DEATH

(1) help factor, (2) control factor, (3) pe communication factor,
(4) interest factor. Unless these four points are present in a
session, it is improbable, in a great number of cases that any
real, lasting gain will be made. (HCOB 21 Apr 60)

DEAD THETAN, 1. doesn’t put out any current. Doesn’t react on
a meter. Only the body reacts so it looks like a clear read (false
read). An ARC break of long duration reads the same way.
(LRH Def. Notes) 2. a false clear read. (HCOB 17 Oct 69)
3. clear read without tone arm motion and tight needle. That’s
your lowest case range, save one. There is one below that. (SH
Spec 300, 6308C28). 4. he’s so “dead in his head” he thinks he’s
elsewhere while he’s there. (SH Spec 1, 6105C07) 5. he thinks of
himself as dead and he is totally incapable of influencing the
E-meter. (SH Spec 1, 6105C07)

DEAFNESS, the individual simply shutting out sounds. Some
deafness is occasioned by entirely mechanical trouble with the
recording mechanism but most deafness, particularly when
partial, is psychosomatic or caused by mental aberration. (SA,
p. 85)

DEAR ALICE, see TR-1.

Death (Def. 1)

DEATH, 1. a state of beingness rather than an action. It means a
fellow’s no longer inhabiting a body. (SH Spec 15X, 6106C15)
2. a separation occurs between the thetan and the body. However,
he takes old facsimiles, energy phenomena and bric-a-brac that
he feels he cannot do without, with him and attaches it to the
next body he picks up. (PAB 130) 3. cessation of creation. An
individual becomes sufficiently morose on the idea of creation

105
DEATH FACSIMILE BOP

that he can actually bring about the condition of inability to
create. (FOT, p. 67) 4. death equals life minus thought equals
mest. (NOTL, p. 14) 5. death is abandonment by theta of a life
organism or race or species where these can no longer serve
theta in its goals of infinite survival. (Scn 0-8, p. 75) 6. life’s
operation of disposing of an outmoded and unwanted organism
so that new organisms can be born and can flourish. (SA, p. 30)
7. a limited concept of the death of the physical part of the
organism. Life and the personality go on. The physical part of
the organism ceases to function. And that is death. (SA, p. 30)
8. a name assigned to what is apparently the mechanism by
which theta recovers itself and the bulk of its volume from the
mest, so as to be able to accomplish a more harmonious conquest
of the mest in a next generation. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 249)

DEATH FACSIMILE BOP, a little hunt, a little nervous twitch of
the needle. (5410CM21)

DEATH TALKER, at 1.5 on the tone scale is the death talker who
is going to save something from destruction by creating great
havoc. This person will not listen to a creative and constructive
plan unless he can see ways and means of using it to destroy.
Warmongers and dictators are markedly in this band. (SOS,
p. 145)

DEATH WISH, succumb postulates. (HCO PL 27 Apr 69)

DEATH ZONE, below 2.0 on the tone scale is the death zone, and
here as the tone lowers increasingly, more danger exists that all
the remaining theta will suddenly at one fell swoop become
entheta. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 13)

DEBUG, to get the snarls or stops out of something. (HCO PL 29
Feb 72 II)

DE-CERTIFICATION, cancellation of an auditor's certificates.
Certificates “pulled” is a measure taken by HCO when these
conditions exist: (a) the auditor has consistently refused super-
vised processing; (b) the auditor has committed antisocial acts
liable for prosecution under criminal law, or (c) continues to
associate with a de-certified auditor and balks efforts of HCO to
bring the person into an HGC for auditing. (HCOB 22 May 60)

106
DEDEX

DECLARE, an action done in Qual after a pc has completed a
cycle of action or attained a state. The pc or pre-OT who knows
he made it must be sent to Exams and Certs and Awards to
attest. A declare completes his cycle of action and is a vital part
of the action. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 II)

DECLARE?, “Preclear has reached a grade or release. Please
look at preclear and pass on to Certs and Awards.” (HCOB 23
Aug 65)

DED, 1. an incident the preclear does to another dynamic and for
which he has no motivator—i.e. he punishes or hurts or wrecks
something the like of which has never hurt him. Now he must
justify the incident. He will use things which didn’t happen to
him. He claims that the object of his injury really DEserveD it,
hence the word DED, which is a sarcasm. (HOM, p. 75) 2. an.
overt act without having a justification for it in the first place.
The motivator is on the wrong side of the overt act and that
motivator on the wrong side of an overt act is called a DED. It’s
a deserved action. (5206CM24C)

DED-DEDEX, 1. the overt-motivator sequence went backwards.
You hit Joe, then he hits you. Although it went this way you
had it figured out that he must have hit you first. So you
invented something that he did to you to motivate your hitting
him. (SH Spec 83, 6612C06) 2. overt-motivator sequence; when
somebody has committed an overt, he has to claim the existence
of motivators—the Ded-Dedex version of Dn. (HCOB 7 Sept 64
II) 3. where the preclear all out of his own imagination has done
something to somebody else and then it has been done to him.
(PAB 18)

DEDEX, 1. an incident which happens to a preclear after he has a
DED. It is always on the same chain or subject, is always after
the DED. It means the DED EXposed. It is covered guilt.
(HOM, p. 75) 2. deserved action explained would be one
interpretation of DEDEX. The deserved action. This is why the
action was deserved. This is why he blew Joe Blink’s head off,
because twenty years later a fellow by the name of Cuffbah
tapped him on the temple. (PDC 29) 3. motivator. (Sen 8-80,
p. 32)

107
DEEP PROCESSING

DEEP PROCESSING, deep processing addresses basic cause and
locates and reduces moments of physical pain and sorrow. (SA,
p. 61)

DEFINITION PROCESSES, the first thing to know about defini-
tion processes is that they are separate and distinct and stand
by themselves as processes. Remedy A and Remedy B. The ©
purpose of definitions processing is fast clearing of “held down
fives” (jammed thinking because of a misunderstood or misap-
plied datums) preventing someone getting on with auditing or
Sen. (HCOB 21 Feb 66)

DEFINITIONS, TYPES OF, (a) differentiative defintion—one
which compares unlikeness to existing states of being or not
being. (b) descriptive definition—one which classifies by charac-
teristics, by describing existing states of being. (c) associative
definition—one which declares likeness to existing states of
being or not being. (d) action definition—one which delineates
cause and potential change of state of being by cause of
existence, inexistence, action, inaction, purpose or lack of
purpose. (AP&A, pp. 65-66)

DEGRADATION, 1. the lower harmonic of apathy. (SH Spec 70,
6110C24) 2. an inability to handle force. (PDC 48) 3. being big
and getting small and not at your own request. (PDC 34)

DEGRADED BEING, 1. the degraded being is not a suppressive
as he can have case gain. But he is so PTS that he works for
suppressives only. He is a sort of super-continual PTS beyond
the reach really of a simple S&D and handled only at Section 3
OT Course. The degraded being is not necessarily a natively bad
thetan. He is simply so PTS and has been for so long that it
requires our highest level of tech to finally undo it after he has
scaled up all our grades. (HCOB 22 Mar 67) 2. very degraded
beings alter-is, refuse to comply without mentioning it. Find
ANY instruction painful as they have been painfully indoc-
trinated with violent measures in the past. They therefore
alter-is any order or don’t comply. A degraded being is not a
suppressive as he can have case gain. But he is so PTS that he
works for suppressives only. Degraded beings, taking a cue
from SP associates, instinctively resent, hate and seek to
obstruct any person in charge of anything. (HCOB 22 Mar 67)
Abbr. DB.

108
DEMON

DEI SCALE, Desire-Enforcement-Inhibit Scale. (PAB 50)

DELUSION, 1. a belief in something which is contrary to fact or
reality resulting from deception, misconception or misassign-
ment. (HCOB 11 May 65) 2. what one person thinks is, but
others don’t necessarily. (SH Spec 72, 6607C28) 3. the postula-
tion by the imagination of occurrences in areas of plus or minus
randomity. (Sen 0-8, p. 90) 4. delusion is imagination out of
control. (Sen Jour, Iss. 14-G)

DEMO, abbreviation for demonstration. Usually refers to either a
clay demo or to a demonstration done with a “demo kit.” (BTB
12 Apr 72R)

DEMO KIT, demonstration kit. Consists of various small objects
such as corks, caps, paper clips, pen tops, batteries— whatever
will do. These are kept in a box or container. Each student
should have one. The pieces are used while studying to
represent the things in the material one is demonstrating. It
helps hold concepts and ideas in place. A demo kit adds mass,
reality and doingness to the significance and so helps the
student to study. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

DEMON, Slang. a by-pass circuit in the mind, called demon
because it was long so interpreted. Probably an electronic
mechanism. (DMSMH Gloss) 2. a bona-fide demon is one who
gives thoughts voice or echoes the spoken word interiorly or
who gives all sorts of complicated advice like a real, live voice
exteriorly. (DMSMH, p. 88) 3. Dn use of the word is descriptive
slang. (EOS, p. 16)

109
DEMON CIRCUIT

DEMON CIRCUIT, 1. that mental mechanism set up by an
engram command which, becoming restimulated and super-
charged with secondary engrams, takes over a portion of the
analyzer and acts as an individual being. Any command
containing “you” and seeking to dominate or nullify the indi-
vidual’s judgment is potentially a demon circuit. It doesn’t
become a real live demon circuit until it becomes keyed-in and
picks up secondary engrams and locks. (NOTL, p. 80) 2. a
heavily charged portion of the analytical mind which has been
captured by the reactive mind and does its bidding, walled off
by charge into a separate entity. (SOS, p. 67) 3, any circuit that
vocalizes your thoughts for you. That’s not natural. It’s an
installed mechanism from engrams and it slows up thought.
(DASF)

DENYER, 1. a phrase which obscures a part of track by implying
it is not there or elsewhere or should not be viewed. (HCOB 15
May 63) 2. any phrase that you could think of in any language
that would deny a person knowledge of something would be
classified as a denyer. (SH Spec 81, 6111C16) 3. a species of
command which, literally translated, means that the engram
doesn't exist. “I’m not here,” “This is getting nowhere,” “I must
not talk about it,” “I can’t remember,” etc. (DMSMH, p. 213)
4. a command which makes the pc feel there is no incident
present. (DMSMBG, p. 213)

DEPARTMENT OF PERSONAL ENHANCEMENT, the Depart-
ment of Personal Enhancement Division V, Qualifications is held
responsible for these things. (1) That no misunderstood words
exist amongst staff, Auditors or in the Church public. (2) That
all training and auditing programs of staff, students, Auditors,
internes or public are in correct sequence without skipped
gradient and done. (3) That all staff cases are progressing
satisfactorily with good OCA (APA) gains and that no no-case-
gain cases are on staff. (HCO PL 16 Feb 72)

DEPARTMENT OF SPECIAL CASES, the HCO PL which makes
Dept 10 a Department of Special Cases is cancelled. Dept 10
must remain as the Department of Tech Services. Drug Cases
(for whom the Department of Special Cases was primarily
established) are audited in the HGC or Co-Audit on the HSDC
Course. (HCO PL 26 Aug 72—Cancellation issue of HCO PL 2
Feb 72 II)

110
DESTIMULATION

DEPLETION OF HAVINGNESS, the truth of something, even
when arrived at by the route of subjection and force, will as-is
the something and cause its vanishment, and thus it is no longer
had. This is called by auditors the depletion of havingness.
(5601C31)

DEPOSIT, a deposit is a confused solid ridge area in the body.
(5206CM24B)

DEPT, department. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)
DEPT 10s, see DEPARTMENT OF SPECIAL CASES.

DERAILER, a type of phrase in an engram which throws the
preclear “off the track” and makes him lose touch with his time
track. This is a very serious phrase since it can make a
schizophrenic and something of this sort is always to be found in
schizophrenia. Some of its phrases throw him into other
valences which have no proper track, some merely remove time,
some throw him bodily out of time. “I don’t have any time” is a
derailer. “I’m beside myself” means that he is now two people,
one beside the other. “I'll have to pretend I am somebody else”
is a key phrase to identity confusion, and many more. (DMSMH,
p. 335)

DESCRIPTION PROCESSING, processing which uses as-isness
in present time to remedy the restimulations beheld by the
thetan. The total command content of description processing is
the phrase “How does... seem to you now?” This is used over,
and over, and over by the auditor. In the blank he puts any
difficulty the preclear is having. (COHA, p. 85)

DESCRIPTIVE DEFINITION, see DEFINITIONS, TYPES OF.
DESTIMULATE, 1. settle out. (HCOB 16 Aug 70) 2. to take away
the restimulation. Destimulate does not mean the erasure of

the original incident, it means simply the knock out of the point
of restimulation. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)

DESTIMULATED, simply knocking out the key-ins of the original
charge, you didn’t knock out the original incidents, you just
knocked out the moments when the original incident was keyed
in. (SH Spec 300, 6308C28)

DESTIMULATION, 1. the action of deleting the moments of
restimulation of the reactive mind or some portion of it, so that
it moves away from the preclear and he is no longer connected

111
DESTROY

to it. (Sen AD) 2. to pull the pc out of the charge not try to erase
the charge. To knock out the key-ins that keep the charge
pinned to the individual. (SH Spec 9, 6403C10)

DESTROY, create-counter-create=to create something against a
creation=to create one thing and then create something else
against it—destroy. (POT, p. 20)

DESTRUCTION, the apparent cycle of action contains destruc-
tion, but the actual cycle of action tells us what destruction is.
Destruction, in terms of action, is a creation of something
against a creation of something else. There is another type of
destruction and this is no more creation. If one stops making
something completely and ceases to be a party to its manu-
facture, it no longer exists for one. (FOT, pp. 21-22)

DETACHED, 1. chronically out of valence to the point of no case
gain. (HCOB 10 Sept 68) 2. the person that you run into that
takes no responsibility for anything in life and that sort of thing.
He isn’t where he is looking from, see? He’s detached. We use
that word advisedly. You see, he’s detached from existence, he
hasn't got anything to do with it. Existence is up here and he’s
sitting back, “has nothing to do with me.” (SH Spec 48, 6411C04)

DETECTING METER, a meter which detects flows and ridges
around your preclear. (PDC 29)

DFT, see DIANETIC FLOW TABLE.

DHARMA, the name of a legendary Hindu sage whose many
progenies were the personification of virtue and religious rites.
Dharma is a mythological figure and we have the word Dharma
almost interchangeable with the word Dhyana. But whatever
you use there you are using a word which means knowingness.
That’s what that word means. (7ACC-25, 5407C19)

DHYANA, 1. the word Dhyana is almost interchangeable with the
word Dharma. But whatever you use, you are using a word
which means knowingness. Dhyana—that’s knowingness. It
means knowingness. It means lookingness. (7ACC-25, 5407C19)
2. Dhyana could be literally translated as Indian for Sen, if you
want to say it backwards. (TACC-25, 5407C19)

DIANAZENE, a formula combined with vitamins and other
minerals to make the intake of nicotinic acid more effective.
Dianazene runs out radiation—or what appears to be radiation.

112
DIANETIC CASE COMPLETION

It also proofs a person up against radiation in some degree. It
also turns on and runs out incipient cancer. (AAR, pp. 123-124)

DIANETIC ASSESSMENT LIST, a list of somatic items given by
a pe and written down by the auditor with the reads marked
that occur on the meter. (BTB 7 Nov 72 IV)

DIANETIC ASSIST, 1. the auditor may take an individual who
has been injured and run the injury as an engram even though it
contains extensive unconsciousness. The last engram on the case
has had relatively little chance to become charged up by locks
and secondaries, and so is available for auditing regardless of the
pre-existing engrams on the case. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 157) 2. running
out the physically painful experience the person has just
undergone, accidents, illness, operation or emotional shock. This
erases the “psychic trauma” and speeds recovery to a remark-
able degree. (HCOB 2 Apr 69)

DIANETIC AUDITING, 1. the application of Dn procedures to an
individual to help him become well and happy. (DPB, p. 11)
2. the tracing of experience. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21) 3. Dianetic
auditing includes as its basic principle, the exhaustion of all the
painfully unconscious moments of a subject’s life. By eradicating
pain from the life of an individual, the auditor returns the
individual to complete rationality and sanity. (DTOT, p. 68)

DIANETIC AUDITOR, 1. a person capable of resolving mental
and physical problems by his ability to find and run engrams and
secondaries. (HCOB 6 Apr 69) 2. a Dianetic auditor would use
Dn to handle the lack of well-being of the pe. (HCOB 6 Apr 69 II)
3. one who has had case gain on Dn, and has been able to
administer Dn so as to give case gains with it and that is what a
Dianetic auditor is. It is not somebody who has been through the
checksheets a large number of times or somebody who knows
the Director of Certs and Awards. (6905C29)

DIANETIC CASE COMPLETION, 1. all somatic chains that were
in restimulation have been traced to basic and blown. The pce is
now happy and healthy. Other engrams and chains can exist
back on the track but as they are not in restimulation they have
no effect on the person. (Dn Today, p. 63) 2. a healthy, happy,
high IQ human being; freedom from those things which make a
person susceptible to, or “hold in place” physical illness. (Sen
0-8, p. 187)

113
DIANETIC CLEAR

DIANETIC CLEAR, 1. there is such a state. Only about two per
cent actually go clear on Dn. A Dn Clear as any other Dn pc now
goes on up through the grades of Scn and onto the proper
Clearing Course. The Dn Clear of Book I was clear of somatics.
The Book I definition is correct. This is the end phenomena of
Dn as per the class chart and Book I. Two percent, no more,
make Dn Clear accidentally. They still need expanded lower
grades to make Sen Clear. (HCOB 25 Jun 70 II) See also
DIANETIC CASE COMPLETION.

DIANETIC COUNSELING GROUP, the Dn Counseling Group
consists of in full action, Hubbard Dn Counselors, the adminis-
trative few people, even if only part time, to handle the admin of
the unit, and a Hubbard Dn Graduate in order to teach Hubbard
Dn Counselors out in the field, and a Sen auditor to hold down
review. (6905C29) Abbr. DCG.

DIANETIC FLOW TABLE, a chronological list of Dn items run,
from earliest to latest, with the flows that have been run.
(HCOB 8 Nov 72R)

DIANETIC INFORMATION GROUP, a group formed to provide
information on the results of Dn and its applications. The
membership is open to doctors, dental surgeons, pharmacists
and qualified nurses. (STCR, p. 104) Abbr. D.LG.

DIANETICIST, a skilled user of Dianetic therapy. (DTOT Gloss)

DIANETIC LIST, in Scn lists there’s only one item. On Dn lists
there can be a dozen, for a Dn list isn’t really a list. It isn’t
trying to isolate the mental troubles of the pe. A Dn list is
simply the pe’s physical aches and pains. (HCOB 21 May 69)

DIANETIC PRECLEAR, one who is being processed toward the
objective of a well and happy human being. (HCOB 6 Apr 69)

DIANETIC RELEASE, 1. the release has reached a point where
he no longer has psychosomatic illnesses, where he has good
stability and where he can enjoy life. If one simply took all the
secondary engrams off a case, one would have a Dianetic
Release. (SOS, p. 19) 2. a preclear in whom the majority of
emotional stress has been deleted from the reactive mind. Has
had many large gains from Dn, is not yet a Dn Case Completion.
(DTOT Gloss)

114
DICHOTOMY

DIANETIC REVERIE, see REVERIE.

DIANETICS, 1. DIA (Greek) through, NOUS (Greek) soul deals
with a system of mental image pictures in relation to psychic
(spiritual) trauma. The mental image pictures are believed on
the basis of personal revelation to be comprising mental activity
created and formed by the spirit, and not by the body or brain.
(BPL 24 Sept 73 V) 2. Dn addresses the body. Thus Dn is used
to knock out and erase illnesses, unwanted sensations, misemo-
tion, somatics, pain, etc. Dn came before Sen. It disposed of
body illness and the difficulties a thetan was having with his
body. (HCOB 22 Apr 69) 3. a technology that runs and erases
locks, secondaries and engrams and their chains. (HCQB 17 Apr
69) 4. Dn could be called a study of man. Dn and Sen, up to the
point of stable exteriorization, operate in exactly the same field
with exactly the same tools. It is only after man is sufficiently
exteriorized to become a spirit that we depart from Dn; for
here, considering man as a spirit, we must enter the field of
religion. (PAB 42) 5. a precision science. It stems from the study
and codification of survival. (COHA, p. 148) 6. a system of
coordinated axioms which resolve problems concerning human
behavior and psychosomatic illnesses. (5110CMOS8B) 7. Dn is not
psychiatry. It is not psycho-analysis. It is not psychology. It is
not personal relations. It is not hypnotism. It is a science of
mind. (DMSMH, p. 168) 8. the route from aberrated or
aberrated and ill human to capable human. (HCOB 3 Apr 66)
Abbr. Dn.

DIANETIC SPECIALIST, HGDS. (HCOB 20 Apr 72)

DIANOMETRY, 1. that branch of Dn which measures thought
capacity, computational ability and the rationality of the human
mind. By its axioms and tests can be established the intelli-
gence, the persistency, the ability, the aberrations and existing
or potential insanity of an individual. (DASF) 2. “Thought
measurement,” derived from the Greek for thought, and,
unscholarly enough, the Latin for mensuration. (DASF)

DICHOTOMY, 1. can-can’t is the plus and minus aspect of all
thought and in Sen is called by a specialized word, dichotomy.
(FOT, p. 100) 2. a pair of opposites, such as black-white,
good-evil, love-hate. (COHA Gloss) 3. opposites; two things
which when interplayed, cause action. (5209CM04B)

115
DIFFERENTIATION

DIFFERENTIATION, 1. the ability to locate things in time and
space. (5209CM04B) 2. simply the distance between the
particles. (PDC 28)

DIFFERENTIATIVE DEFINITION, see DEFINITIONS, TYPES
OF.

D.1.G., Dianetic Information Group. (STCR, p. 104)

DILETTANTISM, is supposed to mean good at many things, but
actually I would rather extend its meaning a little bit to saying
unprofessional at everything. (SH Spec 33, 6408C04)

DIMENSION, the distance from the point of view to the anchor
point that is in space. (Spr Lect 14, 53804CM07)

DIMENSION POINT, any point in a space or at the boundaries of
space. As a specialized case, those points which demark the
outermost boundaries of the space or its corners are called in
Sen anchor points. (Sen 8-8008, p. 16)

DINKY DICTIONARIES, (dinky: small, insignificant); in learning
the meaning of words small dictionaries are very often a greater
liability than they are a help. The meanings they give are often
circular. Like “CAT: an animal.” “ANIMAL: a cat.” They do not
give enough meaning to escape the circle. The meanings given
are often inadequate to get a real concept of the word. The
words are too few and even common words are often missing.
(HCOB 19 Jun 72)

DIP, a falling needle. (EME, p. 14) See FALL.
DIR, director. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

DIR CERTS AND AWARDS, Director of Certificates and
Awards. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

DIRECTION-REVERSAL, confuses left and right. (PAB 12)

DIRECTIVE LISTING, that Routine 3 activity which directs the
pe’s attention while listing to the form of the inevitable reliable
item, providing it can be predicted. (HCOB 8 Apr 63)

DIRECT STYLE AUDITING, (Level IV style), by direct we
mean straight, concentrated, intense, applied in a direct

116
DISAGREEMENT REMEDY

manner. By direct, we don’t mean frank or choppy. On the
contrary, we put the pe’s attention on his bank and anything we
do is calculated only to make that attention more direct. (HCOB
6 Nov 64)

DIRECT VALENCE, a valence by which the pc has transferred
identity with someone who has directly confronted him.
(PAB 95)

DIR EXAMS, Director of Examinations. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
DIR REV, Director of Review. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

DIR TECH SERVICES, Director of Technical Services. (HCOB 23
Aug 65)

DIRTY NEEDLE, 1. symbol D.N.—erratic agitation of the needle ~
which covers less than a quarter of an inch of the E-meter dial
and tends to be persistent. (HCOB 8 Nov 62) 2. ragged, jerky,
ticking needle, not sweeping. (HCOB 15 May 69) 3. a dirty
needle is any needle which departs from the appearance of a
clean needle. (SH Spee 224, 6212C13) 4. a dirty needle is only a
little, tiny persistent rock slam. (SH Spec 184, 6208C14) 5. one
that jerks, tips, dances, halts, is stuck or has any random action
on it with the auditor sitting looking at it doing nothing. (HCOB
30 Dec 62)

DIRTY READ, symbol D.R.—a more or less instant response of
the needle which is agitated by a major thought; it is an instant
tiny (less than a quarter of an inch) agitation of the needle and is
in fact a very small cousin of a rock slam but is not a rock slam.
It does not persist. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

DIRTY 30, Opening Procedure by Duplication has been doing
things to cases hitherto untouched by extensive and intricate
auditing. Because this process is very arduous to run on people
below boredom on the tone scale and because it has very often
been used on people on whom it should not be used, it was early
called “Dirty 30.” Actually “Dirty 30” is Procedure 30 which
encompassed what is now R2-17 and two other steps. (PAB 48)

DISAGREEMENT REMEDY, a procedure for handling disagree-
ments which is done by a Class III or above auditor. (BTB 22
Mar 72R)

117
DISASSOCIATION

DISASSOCIATION, mis-identification. (17ACC-4, 5702C28)

DISCHARGED, 1. an incident which is discharged is no longer
capable of restimulation. It is not now an inert incident, it is a
gone incident. The batteries in it have been short-circuited.
That’s the end of it. (SH Spec 300, 6308C28) 2. where you get a
condition of restimulation which is then let off, that is not
discharged, it is destimulated. Discharged means that the
incident is now incapable of being restimulated. (SH Spec 300,
6308C28)

DISCHARGING, erasing. (SH Spec 300, 6308C28)

DISHONESTY, one would not be dishonest unless he wished to
seek advantage for himself or his group at the expense of some
other self or group. That’s dishonesty. It is seeking an illigiti-
mate advantage and it’s illegitimate just because it violates
somebody’s survival too much. (5108CM13B)

DISINTEGRATING ROCKET READ, a read that starts out like a
mad thing, and turns into a fall. (SH Spec 274, 6306C13)

7

Dispersal

explosion

DISPERSAL, a series of outflows from a common point. A
dispersal is, primarily a number of flows extending from a
common center. The best example of a dispersal is an explosion.
There is such a thing as an in-dispersal. This would be where
the flows are all traveling toward a common center. One might
call this an implosion. Outflow and inflow from a common center
are classified under the word dispersal. (Scn 8-8008, p. 17)

118
D.N.

DISPERSED, hiding oneself, being vague, not there most of the
time. (FOT, p. 29)

DISPERSION, theta turning into entheta and the inhibition of the
flow of free theta. (SOS, p. 114)

DISSEMINATING SCN, getting the materials of Dn and Sen
disseminated widely and by efficient presentation. (BPL 15 Mar
60)

DISTRACTION, a distraction is something that is not relevant to
the pc's case and is ineffective. (SH Spec 78, 6111009)

DIVISION OF TA, one division of TA is from 1 to 2 or similarly
from 2 to 3. It doesn’t matter which way it moves. (SH Spec 1,
6105C07)

DIZZINESS, a feeling of disorientation and includes a spinniness,
as well as an out-of-balance feeling. (HCOB 19 Jan 67)

D/L, date/locate. (HCOB 29 Oct 71R)
Dn, Dianetics. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
D.N., dirty needle. (HCOB 17 May 69)

Dispersal

implosion

119
DO A BUNK

DO A BUNK, 1. an English slang term which meant “run away or
desert.” (7204C07 SO III) 2. the body goes collapse; the heart is
still beating, the lungs are still breathing, because the G.E. runs
those, but the thetan—he’s done a bunk. (PDC 9) 3. that’s what
we say colloquially, means on his way over the hills and far
away and he’s just now passing Galaxy 18. (PDC 46) 4. the
person shoots out of his head and he’s on his way. He hit the
dispersal just adjacent to a ridge. (PDC 23)

DOCTOR OF DIVINITY, religion is basically a_ philosophic
teaching designed to better the civilization into which it is
taught. Backed fully by the precedent of all the ages concerning
teachings, a Scientologist has a better right to call himself a
priest, a minister, a missionary, a doctor of divinity, a faith
healer or a preclear than any other man who bears the insignia
of religion of the western world. I do not see any inconsistency
of any kind in the issuance to those well-schooled and well-
skilled in Scn the degree of Doctor of Divinity as a passport into
those areas where they are needed. (PAB 32)

DOCTOR OF SCIENTOLOGY, 1. the Doctor of Sen degree is senior
to HGA. It is an honor award and may be made by nomination or
selection for those who are consistently producing excellent
results in their own field. (PAB 6) 2. Doctor of Sen abroad [away
from the USA] was equivalent to HGA in 1956. (HCOTB 12 Sept 56)

DOCTRINE OF THE STABLE DATUM, a confusing motion can
be understood by conceiving one thing to be motionless. Until
one selects one datum, one factor, one particular in a confusion
of particles, the confusion continues. The one thing selected and
used becomes the stable datum for the remainder. A stable
datum does not have to be the correct one. It is simply the one
that keeps things from being in a confusion and on which others
are aligned. (POW, pp. 23-24)

D OF ESTIMATIONS, Director of Estimations. In 1965, head of
the Department of Estimations, now called Tech Services which
is in charge of getting pcs to session, having auditing rooms and
materials available for auditors, keeping up pcs’ status and
scheduling boards, and taking care of and safeguarding pc
folders and records. (PRD Gloss)

120
DOMINATION BY NULLIFICATION

D OF P, Director of Processing. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
D OF T, Director of Training. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

DOG CASE, Slang. 1. a case nobody can make anything out of.
(HCOB 5 Mar 71 II) 2. the pc is not running well. Such a case is
the result of a flub always. (HCOB 19 Mar 71, C/S Series 30)

DOG PC, an auditor who cannot audit, whose TRs are out, whose
metering is bad and who never keeps the code always says his
pes are “dogs.” (HCOB 15 Jun 72)

DOING, the action of creating an effect. An effect in creation is
action. (FOT, p. 31)

DOING A BUNK, see DO A BUNK.

DOINGNESS, what one ought to be doing in order to get creation
or do creation. (SH Spec 19, 6106C23)

DOING THE FOLDER, refers to the technical supervision of case
reports. (ISE, p. 45)

DO-IT-YOURSELF PROCESSING, the HAS co-audit which seeks
to improve cases and further interest people in Sen so that they
will take individual HGC processing and individual training.
(HCO PL 14 Feb 61)

DOMINATION, forcing the other person to do exactly what is
desired with the mechanism of recrimination and denial of
friendship or support unless instant compliance takes place. It
seeks by anger and outright criticism, accusations, and other
mechanisms to pound another individual into submission by
making him less. (SA, p. 167)

DOMINATION BY NULLIFICATION, this is covert and quite
often the person upon whom it is exerted remains unsuspecting
beyond the fact that he knows he is very unhappy. This is the
coward’s method of domination. The person using it feels that he
is less than the individual upon whom he is using it and has not
the honesty or fortitude to admit the fact to himself. He then
begins to pull the other individual “down to size,” using small
carping criticisms. The one who is seeking to dominate strikes

121
DOPE-OFF

heavily at the point of pride and capability of his target and yet,
if at any moment the target challenges the nullifier, the person
using the mechanism claims he is doing so solely out of
assistance and friendship or disavows completely that it has
been done. (SA, p. 167)

DOPE-OFF, 1. the phenomenon of a person getting tired, sleepy,
foggy (as though doped ). One of the phenomena of going past a
misunderstood word. (BTB 12 Apr 72) 2. a state of lessened
awareness, still above unconsciousness, and manifested princi-
pally by communication lag. Dope-off is also caused by impaired
havingness. (COHA Gloss)

DOUBLE ACKNOWLEDGMENT, 1. double acknowledgment is
not, repeat not, the giving of more than one good or thank you.
Double acknowledgment only occurs when the auditor assumes
the cycle has ended but the preclear then draws the auditor’s
attention to the fact that it didn’t end and the auditor has to
acknowledge again in order to end that cycle. (BTB 29 Jun 62)
2. this occurs when the pc answers up, the auditor then acknowl-
edges, and the pc then finishes his answer, leaving the auditor
with another acknowledgment to do. (HCOB 12 Nov 59) 3. multi-
ple acks (such as “OK Good.” and “All right Thank you
OK.”) are not OK and must be knocked out by drilling the
auditor so he learns to ack with one ack. TR 2 repeated makes
an overack. (BTB 13 Mar 75)

DOUBLE ASSESS, (Expanded Dianetics term from tape
7203C30, “Expanded Dianetics”) the act of taking various parts
or terminals of the pe’s environment as mentioned in worksheets
or health form such as “home,” “job,” “Ohio,” etc., making it
into a list, assessing it for best read (assessment number one )
and then taking that item (such as “home”) and listing out the
pains, sensations, emotions and attitudes connected with it
(assessment number 2) and running it with Dianetics, or
otherwise using the result in processing. (LRH Def. Notes)

DOUBLE QUESTION, a type of Q and A. The auditor asks a
question. The pe answers. The auditor asks a question about the
answer. (HCOB 24 May 62)

DOUBLE TERMINALING, 1. the process known as double
terminaling is an assist. One double terminals as follows: he has

122
DOWN SCALE

the preclear mock up something or someone facing its duplicate,
then he gets another such pair beside, in any position, the first
pair. It will be noted that the mock-ups discharge one against
the other like electrical poles. A double terminal may also
consist of an unmatched pair such as a mock-up of a husband
facing a wife and, parallel to this, the husband facing the wife
again. Or a person facing an inanimate object, then, beside that
pair, the same person as another mock-up facing the same object
as another mock-up. It will be observed that when TWO pairs
are used, there are, even so, only TWO COMMUNICATION
LINES. The lines are more important than the terminals; one
wants two communication lines, parallel to each other. This, of
course, requires four terminals. (PAB 1) 2. double terminaling
simply puts up two pairs of matched terminals. The pairs may
each be of two different things but each pair contains one thing
the same as the other pair; in other words, husband and wife is
one pair and husband and wife is the other pair. These, parallel,
give the two terminal effect necessary for a discharge. (COHA,
p. 213) 3. there are a number of processes which could include
double terminals. One terminal made to face another terminal in
terms of mock-up can be discharged one against the other in
such a way as to relieve aberration connected with things
similar to the terminal thus mocked up. One takes two pairs of
such terminals and standing them in relationship to each other,
discovers that he has now four terminals but these four
terminals furnish only two lines. These two lines will discharge
one against the other. (Scn 8-8008, p. 32)

DOUBLE TERMINALS, you mock up four of the same person or
two of one person, two of another person, in such a way as to
give you four terminals with an identical line. (Spr Lect 13,
53804CM07)

DOUBLE TICK, dirty needle. (HCOB 25 May 62)

DOUBT, doubting expresses the inability to find out. (SH Spec 39,
6108C15)

DOWN-BOUNCER, this type of phrase is one which tells the
person to “get down” or “get back” and keeps the preclear below
the actual incident in which he is held. (SOS, p. 106)

DOWN SCALE, on the tone scale to go down scale one must
decrease his power to observe. (COHA, p. 200)

123
DOWN THE TRACK

DOWN THE TRACK, not in present time. (HCOB 16 Jul 69)
D.R., dirty read. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

DRAMATIZATION, 1. to repeat in action what has happened to
one in experience. That’s a basic definition of it, but much more
important, it’s a replay now of something that happened then.
It’s being replayed out of its time and period. (SH Spec 72,
6607C28) 2. the duplication of an engramic content, entire or in
part, by an aberree in his present time environment. Aberrated
conduct is entirely dramatization. The degree of dramatiza-
tion is in direct ratio to the degree of restimulation of the
engrams causing it. (DTOT, p. 74) 3. complete dramatization is
complete identity. It is the engram in full force in present time
with the aberree taking one or more parts of the dramatis
personae present in the engram. (DTOT, p. 75) 4. thinking or
acting in a manner that is dictated by masses or significances
contained in the reactive mind. When dramatizing, the indi-
vidual is like an actor playing his dictated part and going
through a whole series of irrational actions. (PXL Gloss)

DRAMATIZE, to go through the cycle of action demanded by an
engram. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 29)

DRAMATIZING PSYCHOTIC, the dramatizing psychotic is not
always looked upon as insane. Whether or not he is classified as
insane depends upon whether or not he is of obvious menace to
other Homo sapiens. He is fixed in one facsimile which he plays
over and over to the environment around him. He is controlled
by his environment to the extent that anything in his environ-
ment turns on his dramatization. He is disastrous to have
around. Inaccessible persons passing for normals are sometimes
dramatizing psychotics who dramatize infrequently—perhaps
only once or twice a day. The dramatizing psychotic lives mainly
in the illusion of his own facsimile with its surroundings, not
actual surroundings. He is definitely not in present time at any
time. (AP&A, p. 38)

DREAM, 1. a pretended knowingness about location. (SH Spec
50, 6109C06) 2. the imaginative reconstruction of areas of
randomity or the re-symbolization of the efforts of theta. (Sen
0-8, p. 90) 3. a dream in its normal function is that powerful and

124
DRUG RUNDOWN

original mechanism called the imagination compositing or creat-
ing new pictures. (DTOT, p. 89) 4. a frantic effort to orient, just
to locate himself so that he can feel secure, that’s what a dream
is and a dream of course is pretended knowingness because he is
at none of these places. (SH Spec 39, 6108C15) 5. dreams follow
a sudden loss. It’s an effort to orient oneself and get something
back. (HCOB 29 Mar 65)

DRIFT DOWN, not actual tone arm action. The pce is just drifting
toward the read of an item. In this the tone arm does not go up
or down, back and forth. It just drifts slowly and evenly down
and stays there. (HCOB 11 Apr 62)

DRIFT UP, occurs during prepchecking or listing. The constantly
rising needle gradually raises the tone arm up to a high read
which finally just stays there. This drift up is not actually tone
arm motion. It is just the pe’s refusal to confront. (HCOB 11 Apr
62)

DRILLS, exercises, processes. (PAB 82)

DRIVE, the dynamic thrust through time toward the attainment
of the goal. (DTOT, p. 29)

DROP, a falling needle. (EME, p. 14) See FALL.

DRUG CASES, cases who seek in processing the delusions or
madness which exhilarated them on drugs. (HCOB 25 Nov 71 II)

DRUG REHAB, see CHEMICAL RELEASE. See REHABBING
DRUGS.

DRUG RUNDOWN, the drug rundown consists of: (1) TRs 0-4,
6-9 FLAT. (2) Full C/S 1, where not done, to fully educate the
pe. (3) Objectives—full battery to full EPs per basic books and
early HCOBs on them. (4) Class VIII Drug Handling—list and
rehab all drugs, 3-way recalls, secondaries and engrams of
taking and giving drugs. (5) AESP’s on each reading drug listed
separately and handled with R3R, each drug to full F/N
assessment of drug list. (6) “No interest” drug items—all
reading ones run where they exist. (7) Prior assessment—
AESP’s listed separately and run R8R, prior to first drug or
alcohol taken. (HCOB 31 Aug 74)

125
DRUGS

DRUGS, 1. by drugs (to mention a few) are meant tranquilizers,
opium, cocaine, mariguana, peyote, amphetamine and the psy-
chiatrists’ gift to Man, LSD which is the worst. Any medical
drugs are included. Drugs are drugs. There are thousands of
trade names and slang terms for these drugs. Alcohol is included
as a drug and receives the same treatment in auditing. (HCOB
15 Jul 71 III) 2. drugs essentially are poisons. The degree they
are taken determines the effect. A small amount gives a
stimulant. A greater amount acts as a sedative. A larger amount
acts as a poison and can kill one dead. This is true of any drug.
(HCOB 28 Aug 68 IT)

Drugs (Def. 1)

DRY RUN, a no-auditing situation. You're running an electrical
circuit with no current. (SH Spec 295, 6308C15)

D. SCN, Doctor of Scientology, honorary award for the applica-
tion of Sen processes, principles, books or literature. (HCOB 23
Aug 65) See DOCTOR OF SCIENTOLOGY.

D. SCN. ABROAD, see DOCTOR OF SCIENTOLOGY.
DTS, Director of Tech Services. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

DUB-IN, 1. any unknowingly created mental picture that appears
to have been a record of the physical universe but is in fact only
an altered copy of the time track. (HCOB 15 May 68) 2. the
phrase out of the motion picture industry of putting a sound
track on top of something that isn’t there. (SH Spec 78,

126
DWINDLING SPIRAL

6608C25) 3. a recording which is being manufactured by a
recording. (5811C07) 4. imaginary recall—there is no pain
dub-in. (DASF)

DUB-IN CASE, this guy is manufacturing incidents and saying
they’re real. (5206CM24F)

DUNNAGE, Slang. 1. the stuff you put around the cargo to keep
it straight in a ship. (PXLZ, p. 244) 2. extra and relatively
meaningless talk. (PAB 38) 3. irrelevant remarks aimed solely to
stay in communication with the preclear. (COHA, p. 88)

DUPLICATION, 1. cause, distance, effect, with the same thing at
effect as is at cause. (5411CM01) 2. the flow of creation.
Duplication is the process by which a thing persists. (2ACC-13A,
53811CM30)

DUPLICATIVE QUESTION (TR-3), a drill to teach a student to
duplicate without variation an auditing question. Each time
newly, in its own unit of time, not as a blur with other
questions, and to acknowledge it. (HCOB 16 Aug 71 II)

DWINDLING ROCK SLAM, one which diminishes item by item,
written thing by written thing. It’s less and less and less and
less, and finally a dirty needle. Then there isn’t even a dirty
needle and it’s gone. (SH Spec 194, 6209C25)

DWINDLING SANITY, a dwindling ability to assign time and
space. (Sen 8-80, p. 44)

DWINDLING SPIRAL, 1. one commits overt acts unwittingly. He
seeks to justify them by finding fault or displacing blame. This
leads him into further overts against the same terminals which
leads to a degradation of himself and sometimes those terminals.
(HCOB 21 Jan 60, Justification) 2. as life progresses, more and
more theta becomes fixed as entheta in locks and secondary
engrams, and less and less theta is available to the organism for
purposes of reason. This is called the dwindling spiral. It is so
called because the more entheta there is on the case, the more
theta will be turned into entheta at each new restimulation. It is
a three-dimensional vicious circle which carries the individual
down the tone scale. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 26)

127
DYNAMIC

DYNAMIC, 1. any one of the eight subdivisions of the dynamic
principle of existence—SURVIVE. (PXL, p. 49) 2. dynamic is
the ability to translate solutions into action. (HFP, p. 171) 3. the
tenacity to life and vigor and persistence in survival. (DMSMH,
p. 38)

DYNAMIC ASSESSMENT, you run on the E-meter a dynamic
assessment and pick up any dynamic that gives a change of
needle pattern or take any dynamic which makes needle drop no
matter how slight. Having located the dynamic we now ask the
pe for any terminal he or she thinks would represent that
dynamic. (HCOB 4 Feb 60)

DYNAMIC ASSESSMENT BY ROCK SLAM, listing and asses-
sing to find the rock slam on the pe. (SH Spec 204, 6210C30)

DYNAMIC DEFINITION, action definition. (5110CM08B) See
DEFINITIONS, TYPES OF.

DYNAMICS, there could be said to be eight urges (drives,
impulses) in life. These we call dynamics. These are motives or
motivations. We call them the eight dynamics. The first dynamic
—is the urge toward existence as one’s self. Here we have
individuality expressed fully. This can be called the self
dynamic. The second dynamic—is the urge toward existence as
a sexual or bisexual activity. This dynamic actually has two
divisions. Second dynamic (a) is the sexual act itself and the
second dynamic (b) is the family unit, including the rearing of
children. This can be called the sex dynamic. The third
dynamic—is the urge toward existence in groups of individuals.
Any group or part of an entire class could be considered to be a
part of the third dynamic. The school, the society, the town, the
nation are each part of the third dynamic, and each one is a third
dynamic. This can be called the group dynamic. The fourth
dynamic—is the urge toward existence as mankind. Whereas
the white race would be considered a third dynamic, all the races
would be considered the fourth dynamic. This can be called the
mankind dynamic. The fifth dynamic—is the urge toward
existence of the animal kingdom. This includes all living things
whether vegetable or animal. The fish in the sea, the beasts of
the field or of the forest, grass, trees, flowers, or anything
directly and intimately motivated by life. This could be called

128
DYNAMICS

the animal dynamic. The sixth dynamic—is the urge toward
existence as the physical universe. The physical universe is
composed of matter, energy, space and time. In Scn we take the
first letter of each of these words and coin a word, mest. This
can be called the universe dynamic. The seventh dynamic—is
the urge toward existence as or of spirits. Anything spiritual,
with or without identity, would come under the heading of the
seventh dynamic. This can be called the spiritual dynamic. The
eighth dynamic—is the urge toward existence as infinity. This is
also identified as the Supreme Being. It is carefully observed
here that the science of Sen does not intrude into the dynamic of
the Supreme Being. This is called the eighth dynamic because
the symbol of infinity co stood upright makes the numeral “8.”
This can be called the infinity or God dynamic. (FOT, pp. 36-38)

Dynamics

first dynamic
self dynamic

second dynamic (Def. b)
sex dynamic

129
DYNAMICS

third dynamic
group dynamic

fourth dynamic
mankind dynamic

fifth dynamic
animal dynamic

130

DYNAMICS

sixth dynamic
universe dynamic

seventh dynamic
(ancient Greek symbol
for spirit)

spiritual dynamic

eighth dynamic
(symbol for infinity}
infinity or God dynamic

131
DYNAMIC STRAIGHTWIRE

DYNAMIC STRAIGHTWIRE, do a survey, one time on the pe,
not every session, to discover any errors in his dynamics. On pes
not familiar with Sen terms use the following words: self, sex,
family, children, groups, mankind, the animal kingdom, birds,
beasts, fish, vegetables, trees, growing things, matter, energy,
space, time, spirits, souls, gods, God. Assess with this question
only, “Tell me something that would represent (each of the
above, one after the other).” When one changes the pattern of
the needle action or when it is definitely balmy, write it down.
When list is completed take these items written down and run:
“Think of something you have done to (selected terminal you
wrote down).” “Think of something you have withheld from
(selected terminal, same one).” Run these terminals one each,
one after the other, until pc seems flat. (HCOB 16 Feb 59)

182
i

EARLIER SIMILAR, 1. whenever an auditor gets a read on an
item from rudiments or a prepared list it must be carried to an
F/N. If you know bank structure you know it is necessary to
find an earlier item if something does not release. What has
been found as a read on a prepared list would F/N if it were the
basic lock. So if it doesn’t F/N, then there is an earlier (or an
earlier or an earlier) lock which is preventing it from F/Ning.
Example: auditor asks for an earlier similar ARC Break. (HCOB
14 Mar 71R)

E/B, earlier beginning. (7203C30)

ECHO INVALIDATION, pc names an item and auditor says,
“That isn’t it.” This is not just bad form but a very vicious
practice that leads to a games condition. The invalidation of each
item makes the pe very dizzy and very desperate. (HCOB 13
Apr 64, Sen VI Tone Arm Action)

ECHO METERING, the pc says, “You missed a suppress. It’s . . .”
and the auditor reconsults the meter asking for a suppress. That
leaves the pe’s offering an undischarged charge. Never ask the
meter after a pc volunteers a button. Example: You've declared

133
ED-1

suppress clean, pe gives you another suppress. Take it and don’t
ask suppress again. That’s echo metering. If a pc puts his own
ruds in, don’t at once jump to the meter to put his ruds in. That
makes all his offerings missed charge. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Scn VI
Part One Tone Arm Action)

ED-1, -2, etc., Expertise Drill. (BTB 20 Jul 74) See AUDITOR
EXPERTISE DRILLS.

EDUCATION, 1. the conveyance of ideas, patterns and creations
from one person to another for knowing retention and conscious
use by the second person. (HCOB 27 Apr 71) 2. basically, fixing
data, unfixing data and changing existing data, either by making
it more fixed or less fixed. (BTB 14 Sept 69 I) 3. learning,
knowing or accomplishing the knowingness of a certain subject,
and would be in the direction of accomplishing certain actions
professionally. One expects an educated person to be able to
accomplish certain things in the subject he is educated in. He
should be able to accomplish the actions and results that are
taught in the subject. (Abz 190) 4. the activity of relaying an
idea or an action from one being to another, in such a way as not
to stultify or inhibit the use thereof and that’s about all it is. You
could add to it that it permits, then, the other fellow to think on
this subject and develop. (SH Spec 33, 6408C04) 5. the process
by which the individual is given the accumulated data of a long
span of culture. It can, no less validly than personal experience,
solve many of his problems, (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 9)

EDUCATIONAL DIANETICS, contains the body of organized
knowledge necessary to train minds to their optimum efficiency
and to an optimum of skill and knowledge in the various
branches of the works of man. (DMSMH, p. 152)

EFFECT, 1. receipt point and what is received at the receipt
point. (PAB 30) 2. a potential receipt of flow. (COHA, p. 258)

EFFECT GOALS, ambition to be an effect rather than a cause.
(COHA, p. 200)

EFFECT SCALE, a scale which tells you how much cause the
individual dare be by measuring how much effect he’s willing to
suffer. At the top of the scale the individual can give or receive

134
EFFORT PROCESSING

any effect, and at the bottom of the scale he can receive no
effects but he still feels he must give a total effect. (5904C08)

EFFORT, 1. the physical force manifestation of motion. A sharp
effort against an individual produces pain. A strenuous effort
produces discomfort. Effort can be recalled and re-experienced
by the preclear. No preclear below 2.5 should be called upon to
use effort as such as he is incapable of handling it and will stick
in it. The essential part of a painful facsimile is its effort, not its
perceptions. (HFP Gloss) 2. directed force. (Sen 0-8, p. 75)
3. making two things coincide at one point or stop coinciding at a
point or change coincidence at a point. (2ACC-31B, 5312CM22)
4, condensed feeling. (2ACC-21A, 5312CM11)

EFFORT-POINT, that area from which a person exerted effort,
and that area into which that person received effort. (PXL, pp.
257-258)

Effect

EFFORT PROCESSING, 1. the bank can be considered to have
three layers. Effort-Emotion-Thought. Effort buries emotion.
Emotion buries thought. A physical aberration or physical
disability is held in place by a counter-effort. Effort processing
removes the effort which uncovers the pc’s own emotion and
removes the emotion which uncovers and blows the pc’s
thoughts and postulates about the disability as these are the
aberrative source of it. (BTB 1 Dec 71R IV) 2. processing which

135
8-C

lifts up for emphasis the fact that only one’s self-determinism is
important, and that the efforts and the counter-efforts against it
are the aberrative factor. Rediscovering times for the preclear
when he gave up his self-determinism, and erasing the efforts
involved in these postulates and incidents is giving back that
individual’s happiness and assisting him to move again in a
survival direction. (DAB, Vol. II, p. 105)

8-C, 1. control (Routine 8-Control). (HCOB 20 Aug 71 II) 2. essen-
tially and intimately the operation of making the physical
body contact the environment. (5410CM08) 3. name of a process.
Also used to mean good control. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

8D, Standard Operating Procedure 8D, 1954. Primarily for heavy
cases the goal of this procedure was “to bring the preclear to
tolerate any viewpoint.” (PXL, p. 205)

8-80, see TECHNIQUE 8-80.
8-8008, see SCIENTOLOGY 8-8008.

EIGHT, the symbol of infinity co stood upright makes the numeral
“8.” (PAB 83)

EIGHTH DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.
8 LEVELS OF CASES, see STATE OF CASE SCALE.

8RB, word clearing series 8RB, the standard C/S for word
clearing Method 1 in session. (HCOB 30 Jun 71R II)

EJECTOR, species of command. These are colloquially called
“bouncers.” They include such things as “Get out!” “Don’t ever
come back,” “I’ve got to stay away,” etc. etc., including any
combination of words which literally mean ejection. (DMSMH,
p. 213)

ELAN VITAL, theta, life force, life energy, divine energy, the
energy peculiar to life. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 21)

ELECTRICAL, is the bridge between sensation and pain and is
difficult to classify as either pain or sensation when it exists
alone. (HCOB 8 Nov 62) [This definition of electrical is a
specialized definition of the word in terms of how it applies in

136
E-METER

the field of perceptics. Only the technical usage of the word as it
is used in Dn and Sen is defined here.]

ELECTRICITY, a flow manifestation of force. (5312CM17)

ELECTRONICS, lower and cruder manifestations of the same
order of actuality as thought. (Sen 8-8008 Gloss)

ELECTROPSYCHOMETER, it’s an electrical means of measuring
the spirit. It’s exactly what its name says, electropsychometer.
It’s called for short, E-meter. (Class VIII, No. 7) See also
E-METER.

EMERGENCY AUDITOR, this person is the person called upon
by the group auditor to assist a preclear in the group who has

hit a sudden “grief charge” or who is consistently “boiling-off.”
(GAH, p. iii)

EM, E-meter. Where EM is followed directly by a number (e.g.
EM 16) it refers to the E-meter drill of that number. (BTB 12
Apr 72R)

E-meter

E-METER, 1. the E-meter is a religious artifact used as a spiritual
guide in the church confessional. It is an aid to the auditor
(minister, student, pastoral counselor) in two-way communica-
tion locating areas of spiritual travail and indicating spiritual
well-being in an area. (HCO PL 24 Sept 73 VII) 2. Hubbard
Electrometer. An electronic instrument for measuring mental
state and change of state in individuals, as an aid to precision

137
E-METER CALIBRATION

and speed in auditing. The E-meter is not intended or effective
for the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of any disease. (Sen
AD) 3. used to verify the preclear’s gain and register when each
separate auditing action is ended. (HCOB 5 Apr 69R) 4. Elec-
tropsychometer. (HCOB 23 Aug 65) 5. the meter tells you
what the preclear’s mind is doing when the preclear is made to
think of something. The meter registers before the preclear
becomes conscious of the datum. It is therefore a pre-conscious
meter. It passes a tiny current through the preclear’s body. This
current is influenced by the mental masses, pictures, circuits
and machinery. When the unclear pc thinks of something, these
mental items shift and this registers on the meter. (EME, p. 8)

E-METER CALIBRATION, see CALIBRATION.
E-METER CHECK, see METER CHECK.

EMOTION, 1. a response by a wave-length affecting an individual
or another which produces a sensation and a state of mind. (SH
Spec 83, 6612C06) 2. emotion is three things—engramic re-
sponse to situations, endocrine metering of the body to meet
situations on an analytical level and the inhibition or the
furtherance of life force. (Scn 0-8, p. 66) 3. a manifestation, a
condition of beingness which is the connector between thought
and effort. The tone scale is a direct index of emotion.
(5203CM05B) 4. the intention to exert effort bridges into the
body by emotion. In other words, the physical-mental bridge is
emotion. Emotion is motion. (5203CM04B) 5. emotion could be
called the energy manifestation of affinity. As used in Dn,
emotion could be called the index of the state of being. In the
English language, “emotional” is often considered synonymous
with “irrational.” This would seem to assume that if one is
emotional one cannot be reasonable. No more unreasonable
assumption could possibly be made. (SOS, p. 48) 6. this word is
redefined in Dn and is given an opposite for comparison,
“misemotion.” Previously the word emotion was never satisfac-
torily defined. Now it is defined as an organism manifestation of
position on the tone scale which is rationality appropriate to the
present time environment and which truly represents the
present time position on the tone scale. Rational effect. (SOS
Gloss)

138
END PHENOMENA

EMOTIONAL CHARGE, emotional charge may be contained in
any engram: the emotion communicates, in the same tone level,
from the personnel around the “unconscious” person into his
reactive mind. Anger goes into an engram as anger, apathy as
apathy, shame as shame. Whatever people have felt emotionally
around “an unconscious” person should be found in the engram
which resulted from the incident. (DMSMH, p. 251)

EMOTIONAL CURVE, 1. the drop from any position above 2.0 to
a position below 2.0 on the realization of failure or inadequacy.
It is easily recovered by preclears. (AP&A, p. 24) 2. the drop or
rise from one level of emotion to another. (HFP, p. 120)

EMOTIONAL SCALE, refers to the subjective feelings of the
individual, in relation to his position on the tone scale. (NOTL,
p. 102)

EMOTIONAL TONE SCALE, see TONE SCALE.

EMOTION-POINT, that point from which a person emotes, and at
which he emoted. (PXL, p. 257)

EMPIRICAL FACT, one that is established by observation, not
established by theory or reason. (SH Spec 61, 6110C03)

END OF CYCLE, a finite stop. (5311CM24)

END OF CYCLE PROCESSING, in end of cycle processing you
merely keep mocking up a finished, completed task, a goal, and
so on up to a point where you've obtained that goal. (5312CM21)

END PHENOMENA, those indicators in the pe and meter which
show that a chain or process is ended. It shows in Dn that basic
on that chain has been erased and in Sen that the pe has been
released on that process being run. Any Dn auditing below
power processing has four definite reactions in the pe which
show the process is ended. (1) floating needle, (2) cognition, (3)
very good indicators, (pe happy), (4) erasure of the final picture
audited. The 0 to IV Sen end phenomena are (1) floating needle,
(2) cognition, (3) very good indicators, (4) release. (HCOB 20
Feb 70) Abbr. EP.

139
END RUDIMENTS

END RUDIMENTS, rudiments to make the pe feel ok by session
end. They are to clean up additional residual charge left by
reason of the session and they are to put the pc in a frame of
mind to end the session. (SH Spec 121, 6203C01)

END WORD, 1. the common denominator to the whole of a GPM.
(SH Spec 50, 6412C22) 2. the final word of a goal. (HCOB 17 Aug
64)

ENERGY, 1. energy would simply mean a potential of motion or
power. It’s potential or actual motion or force. (SH Spec 84,
6612C13) 2. energy derives from imposition of space between
terminals and a reduction and expansion of that space. (COHA,
p. 256) 3. there are three kinds of energy. There’s a flow, and
then there’s a dispersal, and then there’s a ridge. (PDC 18) 4. a
mass of particles which is a mass of motion. (5203CM04B)
5. postulated particles in space. (PXL, p. 150) 6. energy is
subdivisible into a large motion, such as a flow, a dispersal, or a
ridge, and a small motion which is itself commonly called a
“particle” in nuclear physics. Agitation within agitation is the
basic formation of particles of energy, such as electrons, protons
and others. (Sen 8-80, p. 43)

ap

Energy (Def. 1)

ENFORCED AFFINITY, the demand on the individual that he
experience or admit affinity when he has not felt it. People
lower toned than the preclear commonly command his affinity;
and when affinity is given but not felt locks are formed which
are quite enturbulative should engrams underlie such an en-
forcement. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 72)

140
ENGRAM

ENFORCED COMMUNICATION, the demand on the individual
that he experience or admit communication when he has not felt
it. Enforced communication is productive of all manner of
aberration and physiological changes in the individual. When the
individual is forced to listen to something he would not ordi-
narily listen to if left to his own self-determinism, his hearing to
that degree is impaired. When he has been forced to touch
something which he would not ordinarily touch, his tactile is
thus impaired. When he has been forced to talk when his
self-determinism says he should remain silent, his speech
communication is impaired. (SOS, Bk. 2, pp. 72-73)

ENFORCED HAVE, making someone accept what they didn’t
want. (HCOB 3 Jun 72R)

ENFORCED OVERT HAVE, forcing upon another a substance,
action or thing not wanted or refused by the other. (HCO PL 12
May 72)

ENFORCED REALITY, the demand on the individual that he
experience or admit reality when he has not felt it. Any time a
person is made to agree by force or threat or deprivation, to
another’s reality and yet does not feel that reality himself, an
aberrative condition exists. (SOS, Bk. 2, pp. 72-73)

ENGRAM, 1. a mental image picture which is a recording of a
time of physical pain and unconsciousness. It must by definition
have impact or injury as part of its content. (HCOB 23 Apr 69)
2. a specialized kind of facsimile. This differs from other mental
pictures because it contains, as part of its content, unconscious-
ness and physical pain. (Dn 55/, p. 12) 3. a complete recording,
down to the last accurate detail, of every perception present in a
moment of partial or full unconsciousness. (Scn 0-8, p. 11) 4. a
theta facsimile of atoms and molecules in misalignment. (Scn
0-8, p. 81) 5. a unit of force which is held in because one has
chosen force itself for his randomity. (5312CM13) 6. the word
engram is an old one borrowed from biology. It means simply, “a
lasting memory trace on a cell.” It may be engraved on more
than the cell, but up against Dn processing, it is not very
lasting. (SOS, p. 10) 7. physical pain, enmest and entheta held at

141
ENGRAM BANK

a specific point on the time track. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 25) 8. a severe
physical pain causes considerable analytical attenuation, shut-
ting off the analyzer thoroughly for a period of time. This,
technically, is an engram, although any incident, painful or not,
contained in the reactive mind, and occluded by anaten can be
considered an engram. (SOS, p. 80) 9. a recording which has the
sole purpose of steering the individual through supposed but
usually nonexistent dangers. (SOS, p. 10) 10. a severe area of
plus or minus randomity of sufficient volume to cause uncon-
sciousness. (Scn 0-8, p. 81) 11. a moment when the analytical
mind is shut down by physical pain, drugs or other means, and
the reactive bank is open to the receipt of a recording.
(DMSMH, p. 153) 12. simply moments of physical pain strong
enough to throw part or all the analytical machinery out of
circuit; they are antagonism to the survival of the organism or
pretended sympathy to the organism’s survival. That is the
entire definition. Great or little unconsciousness, physical pain,
perceptic content, and contra-survival or pro-survival data.
(DMSMGH, p. 68) 13. not a sentient recording containing mean-
ings. It is merely a series of impressions such as a needle
might make on wax. These impressions are meaningless to the
body until the engram keys-in, at which time aberrations and
psychosomaties occur. (DMSMH, p. 131) 14. a bundle of data
which includes not only perceptics and speech present but also
metering for emotion and state of physical being. (DMSMH,
p. 245) 15. an apparent surcharge in the mental circuit with cer-
tain definite finite content. That charge is not reached or examined
by the analytical mind but that charge is capable of acting as an
independent command. (DTOT, p. 43)

ENGRAM BANK, a colloquial name for the reactive mind. It is
that portion of a person’s mind which works on a stimulus
response basis. (PXL Gloss)

ENGRAM CHAIN, a basic engram and a series of similar
incidents. (DTOT, p. 112) See CHAIN.

ENGRAM COMMAND, any phrase contained in an engram.
(DMSMH Gloss)

ENGRAMIC THOUGHT, 1. thought that demands immediate
action without examination by the analytical mind. (Scn Jour

142
ENMEST

28-G) 2. irrational identity thought by which the mind is made to
conceive identities where only vague similarities may exist.
Engramic thinking can be stated by A equals A equals A equals
A equals A. (DTOT, p. 64)

Engram (Def. 1, 2)

ENMEST, 1. another word meaning enturbulated mest. (SOS,
p. 5) 2. below 2.0 on the tone scale mest is considered to be
confused and enturbulated and is referred to as enmest. Mest, in
a life form, is an orderly array above 2.0 on the tone scale.
(SOS, p. 41) 3. enmest could be considered mest with a somehow
reversed polarity. It is fighting to get free from theta. The
entrapped enmest seeks to fight away from anything which even
closely resembles entheta and so attacks all theta. (DAB, Vol.
II, p. 136) 4. mest which has been enturbulated by entheta or
crushed too hard into theta and rendered less usable. (SOS
Gloss)

143
ENTHETA

ENTHETA, 1. means enturbulated theta (thought or life); espe-
cially refers to communications, which, based on lies and
confusions, are slanderous, choppy or destructive in an attempt
to overwhelm or suppress a person or group. (Sen AD) 2. theta
which has been confused and chaotically mixed with the material
universe and which will lie in this confusion until death or some
other process disenturbulates it. Theta, below 2.0 on the tone
scale, we call] entheta. (SOS, p. 41) 3. anger, sarcasm, despair,
slyly destructive suggestions. (HTLTAE, p. 88)

ENTITIES, ridges on which facsimiles are planted. Each one of
those things can be a thinking entity. It thinks it’s alive. It can
think it’s a being, as long as energy is fed to it. (PDC 36)

ENTRAPMENT, the opposite of freedom. A person who is not
free is entrapped. He may be trapped by an idea; he may be
trapped by matter; he may be trapped by energy or space or
time; or he may be trapped by all of them. The more thoroughly
a person is trapped, the less free he is. He cannot move, he
cannot change, he cannot communicate, he cannot feel affinity
and reality. Death itself could be said to be man’s ultimate in
entrapment; for when a man is totally entrapped, he is dead.
(Abil 254)

ENTURBULATE, cause to be turbulent or agitated and dis-
turbed. (Scn AD) [The mechanics of enturbulation can be found
in SOS Chapter One.]

ENVIRONMENT, 1. the physical universe, security, it’s right
there, it’s solid. This is the space of the room, the floor, the
ceiling, the. walls, the objects there, and if we happen to be
looking through these things, then it’s the walls in the next
room, and up through the roof, the air about the house and
down through, it’s the earth underneath the house. (PXL, pp.
218-219) 2. the surroundings of the preclear from moment to
moment in particular or in general, including people, pets,
mechanical objects, weather, culture, clothing or the Supreme
Being. Anything he perceives or believes he perceives. The
objective environment is the environment everyone agrees is
there. The subjective environment is the environment the
individual himself believes is there. They may not agree. (HFP
Gloss)

144
ERASURE

ENVIRONMENTAL ABERRATION, the result of aberrated
persons and situations in the individual’s present-time environ-
ment. This is normally temporary, but cumulative environ-
mental entheta has a chronic effect in the case. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 103)

EO, Ethics Officer. (HCO PL 7 Mar 72R)
EP, end phenomena. (HCOB 20 Feb 70)

EPICENTER, the epicenters would be such parts of the body as
the “funny bones” or any “judo-sensitive” spots: the sides of the
neck, the inside of the wrist, the places the doctors tap to find

- out if there is a reflex. Those things are sub-brains picked up on
the evolutionary line probably. They have a monitoring effect on
the body and the individual. (PAB 2)

EPICENTER THEORY, the theory of epicenters merely states
that there is an evolution of command posts and that those
command posts remain structurally visible in the organism.
They can be found in the organism and they still behave as
lower echelon command posts, control centers in other words.
(5110CM11B) See also EPICENTER.

EPISTEMOLOGY, a philosophical term meaning “the study of
knowledge.” (Abil Ma 270)

E. PURP, (Ev Purp) evil purpose. (HCOB 28 Mar 74)

ERASE, to recount an engram until it has vanished entirely.
There is a distinct difference between a reduction and an
erasure. If the engram is early, if it has no material earlier
which will suspend it, that engram will erase. (DMSMH, p. 287)

ERASED, the words “vanished” or “erased,” when applied to an
engram which has been treated mean that the engram has
disappeared from the engram bank. It cannot be found after-
wards except by search of the standard memory. (DMSMH,
p. 207)

ERASING AUDITING, treating the session as an incident and
erasing it as a lock. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21)

ERASURE, 1. the act of erasing, rubbing out, locks, secondaries
or engrams. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) 2. apparent removal of the

145
E/S

engram from the files of the engram bank and refiling in the
standard bank as memory. (DMSMH, p. 286) 3. erasure, in
essence, is a knowingness process rather than an energy rub-out
process. It teaches somebody that he can duplicate the expe-
rience and is still alive. (5312CM16)

E/S, earlier similar. (HCOB 14 Mar 71R)

ESPINOL, this society belongs nominally to the Espinol United
Stars. This is sun twelve and it is one little tiny pinpoint. Their
whole title is “Espinol United Stars, moons, planets and
asteroids this part of the Universe is ours—this quarter of the
Universe is ours”—it translates better. (SH Spee 281, 6807C09)
[Note on SH Spec 297, 6308C21 LRH refers to this as the
Espinol Confederacy a civilization, duration of which was prob-
ably on the order of a few hundred thousand years and which
engaged in implanting. ]

ESTO, Establishment Officer. An ESTO is a third dynamic
auditor who deaberrates a group by cleanly organizing it so it
can produce. (FSO 529)

ETH?, “This preclear may be an ethics case, roller coaster or no
case gain.” (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

ETHICAL CODE, an ethical code is not enforceable, is not to be
enforced, but is a luxury of conduct. A person conducts himself
according to an ethical code because he wants to or because he
feels he is proud enough or decent enough, or civilized enough to
so conduct himself. An ethical code, of course, is a code of
certain restrictions indulged in to better the manner of conduct
of life. (PAB 40)

ETHICAL CONDUCT, conduct out of one’s own sense of justice
and honesty. When you enforce a moral code upon people you
depart considerably from anything like ethics. People obey a
moral code because they are afraid. People are ethical only when
they are strong. (Dn 55!, p. 25)

ETHICS, 1. the term is used to denote ethics as a subject, or the
use of ethics, or that section of a Scientology Church which
handles ethics matters. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) 2. ethics actually
consist, as we can define them now in Dn, of rationality toward

146
EVIL

the highest level of survival for the individual, the future race,
the group, and mankind, and the other dynamics taken collec-
tively. Ethics are reason. The highest ethic level would be
long-term survival concepts with minimal destruction, along any
of the dynamics. (SOS, p. 128) 3. ethics has to do with a code of
agreement amongst people that they will conduct themselves in
a fashion which will obtain to the optimum solution of their
problems. (5008C30) 4. the rules or standards governing the
conduct of the members of a profession. (HCO PL 3 May 72) 5.
ethics is a personal thing. By definition, the word means “the
study of the general nature of morals and the specific moral
choices to be made by the individual in his relationship with
others.” (AHD) When one is ethical or “has his ethies in” it is by
his own determination and is done by himself. (HCOB 15 Nov 72
II) 6. that which is enforced by oneself, his belief in his own
honor, and good reason, and optimum solution along the eight
dynamics. (PDC 37)

ETHICS BAIT, a person in continual heavy ethics or who is out
ethics. (HCO PL 4 Apr 72)

ETHICS CASES, SPs and PTSes. (HCOB 3 Apr 66)

EUPHORIA, gleeful happiness about something. (SH Spec 59,
6504C27)

EVALUATION, 1. telling the pe what to think about his case.
(HCOB 4 Aug 60) 2. evaluation for a person could be defined as
the action of shaking his stable data without giving him further
stable data with which he can agree or in which he can believe.
(PAB 938) 3. the reactive mind’s conception of viewpoint.
(COHA, p. 208) 4. the shifting of viewpoints or the effort to do
so. (PAB 8)

EVALUATION OF DATA, a datum is as understood as it can be
related to other data. (SOS Gloss)

EVIL, 1. that which inhibits or brings plus or minus randomity
into the organism, which is contrary to the survival motives of
the organism. (Scn 0-8, p. 92) 2. may be classified as those
things which tend to limit the dynamic thrust of the individual,
his family, his group, his race, or life in general in the dynamic
drive, also limited by the observation, the observer and his

147
EVIL PURPOSE

ability to observe. (DTOT, pp. 20-21) 3. evil is the opposite of
good, and is anything which is destructive more than it is
constructive along any of the various dynamics. A thing which
does more destruction than construction is evil from the
viewpoint of the individual, the future, group, species, life, or
mest that it destroys. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 34)

EVIL PURPOSE, destructive intentions. (7203C30SO) Abbr. Ev
purp.

EVOLUTION, there are four evolutionary tracks, evidently.
Organism evolution, through natural selection, accident and
(evidence suggests) outright planning. Mest evolution, brought
about through the agency of life organisms. Theta evolution, a
postulated process of learning in theta as a whole or as entities.
And present time ladder-of-support evolution, in which less
complicated organisms support more complicated organisms.
(SOS Gloss)

EXAGGERATERS, engramic commands which give the aspect of
too much pain and too much emotion. (DMSMH, p. 347)

EXAMINER, that person in a Scientology Church assigned to the
duties of noting pc’s statements, TA position and indicators

after session, or when pe wishes to volunteer information. (HCO
PL 4 Dec 71 V)

EXAM REPORT, a report made out by the Qual Examiner when
the pe goes to Exams after session or goes on his own volition. It
contains the meter details, pe’s indicators and the pe’s state-
ment. (BTB 3 Nov 72R) -

EXCALIBUR, 1. “Excalibur” was an unpublished book written in
the very late 1930’s. Only fragments of it remain. (HCOB 17 Mar
69) 2. an unpublished work most of which has been released in
HCOBs, PLs and books. (HCO PL 26 Apr 70)

EXCHANGE BY DYNAMICS, a person who doesn’t produce
becomes mentally or physically ill. For his exchange factor is
out. The remedy is rather simple. First one has to know all
about exchange as covered in the product clearing policy letters.

148
EXPANDED DIANETICS

Then he has to specially clear this up with people who do not
produce. Clear up the definitions of dynamics then have the
person draw up a big chart and say what he gives the first
dynamic and what it gives him. And so on up the dynamics.
Now, have him consider “his own second dynamic.” What does
his second dynamic give his first dynamic. What does his second
dynamic give the second dynamic and what does it give him.
And so on until you have a network of these exchange arrows,
each both ways. Somewhere along the way he will have quite a
cognition. That, if it’s a big one is the end phenomena of it. And
don’t be surprised if you see a person now and then change his
physical face shape. (HCO PL 4 Apr 72) [The above is a brief
summary of the action. Full data can be found in the referenced
HCO PL.]

EXCHANGED VALENCE, 1. one has directly superimposed the
identity of another on his own. Example, daughter becomes own
mother to some degree. (FOT, p. 95) 2. a direct assumption of
another valence. (HCOB 14 Jul 56)

EX DN, Expanded Dianetics. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

EXHIBITIONISTIC, displaying himself too thoroughly, being too
much there at all times. (FOT, p. 29)

EXISTENCE, 1. an existing state or fact of being; life; living;
continuance of being; and occurrence; specific manifestation.
(HCOB 11 May 65) 2. apparency, reality, livingness. (FOT,
p. 26) 3. a test or perception of existence. (PDC 5)

EXOGENETIC, there are two kinds of illness: the first could be
called autogenetic, which means that it originated within the
organism and was self-generated, and exogenetic, which means
that the origin of the illness was exterior. The Pasteur germ
theory would be the theory of exogenetic—exteriorly generated
—illness. (DMSMH, p. 92)

EXPANDED DIANETICS, that branch of Dn which uses Dn in
special ways for specific purposes. It is not HSDC Dn. Its
position on the grade chart would be just above Class IV. Its
proper number is Class IVA. It uses Dn to change an Oxford
Capacity Analysis (or an American Personality Analysis) and is

149
EXPANDED DIANETIC SPECIALIST

run directly against these analysis graphs and the Science of
Survival “Hubbard Chart of Human Evaluation.” Expanded
Dianetics is not the same as Standard Dn as it requires special
training and advanced skills. The main difference between these
two branches is that Standard Dn is very general in application.
Expanded Dn is very specifically adjusted to the pc. Some pes,
particularly heavy drug cases, or who have been given injurious
psychiatric treatment or who are physically disabled or who are
chronically ill or who have had trouble running engrams (to
name a few) require a specially adapted technology. (HCOB 15
Apr 72) Abbr. Ex Dn, XDn.

EXPANDED DIANETIC SPECIALIST, an HGDS (Hubbard
Graduate Dianetic Specialist). (HCOB 15 Apr 72R)

EXPANDED GITA, an extension of Give and Take processing.
Expanded Gita remedies contra-survival abundance and scar-
city. (COHA, p. 227)

EXPANDED LOWER GRADES, pcs won't like being told they
“have to have their lower grades rerun.” Actually that’s not a
factual statement anyway. The lower grades harmonic into the
OT levels. They can be run again with full 1950-1960 to 1970
processes as given on the SH courses all through the 1960's.
These are now regrouped and sorted out and are called
Expanded Lower Grades. (HCOB 25 Jun 70 II)

EXPERIENCE, the doingness of a beingness. (SH Spec 107,
6201031)

EXPLOSION, an outflow of energy usually violent but not
necessarily so, from a more or less common source point. (Scn
8-8008, p. 49)

EXT, 1. extended. (Class VIII No. 11) 2. exterior. (HCOB 5 Apr
71)

EXTENDED HEARING, I. too high an alertness to sounds. This
accompanies, quite ordinarily, a general fear of the environment
or the people in it. (SA, p. 85) 2. able to hear much more
acutely. (DMSMH, p. 94)

150
EXTRAORDINARY SOLUTIONS

EXTENSION COURSE, consists of a textbook and a series of
lessons done on a glued-top table, one sheet per lesson, eight
questions or exercises per lesson. The extension course should
give the taker a passing knowledge of Dn and Sen terminology,
phenomena and parts. (HCOB 16 Dec 58)

EXTERIOR, the fellow would just move out, away from the
body and be aware of himself as independent of a body but still
able to control and handle the body. (Spee Lect 7006C21)

EXTERIORILY DETERMINED, compelled to do or repressed
from doing without his own rational consent. (DMSMH, p. 229)

EXTERIORIZATION, 1. the state of the thetan, the individual
himself, being outside his body. When this is done, the person
achieves a certainty that he is himself and not his body. (PXL
Gloss) 2. the phenomenon of being in a position in space
dependent on only one’s consideration, able to view from that
space, bodies and the room, as it is. (PAB 125) 3. the act of
moving out of the body with or without full perception. (HCOB
22 Oct 71)

EXTERIORIZATION RUNDOWN, a remedy designed to permit
the pc to be further audited after he has gone exterior. The Ext
Rundown is not meant to be sold or passed off as a method of
exteriorizing a pc. (HCOB 2 Dec 70, C/S Series No. 23,
Exteriorization Summary) [NOTE: the above HCOB has since
been revised to HCOB 17 Dec 71R, C/S Series 23RA, Interiori-
zation Summary. All references to Exteriorization Rundown in
the former HCOB have been changed to Interiorization Run-
down in the latter HCOB. This is also known as Interiorization
Rundown, Int Rundown, Int-Ext Rundown, Ext-Int Rundown. ]
Abbr. Ext RD or Int RD.

EXTRAORDINARY SOLUTIONS, extraordinary solutions are
only required when the basics of auditing are violated, and that
is an extraordinary solution, definition of—that activity which
somebody thinks he ought to do because all the basics of
auditing have been flubbed. (SH Spec 60, 6109C28)

151
EXTRAPOLATING

EXTRAPOLATING, getting some more and some more and some
more application of the same datum. Theoretical adding up of
data. (5211C10)

EXT RD, Exteriorization Rundown. (HCOB 12 Apr 71, C/S Series
35, Exteriorization Errors) [NOTE: The above HCOB has since
been revised to HCOB 16 Dec 71RA, Revised 19 Sept 74, C/S
Series 35RA Interiorization Errors. All references to Ext RD in
the former HCOB have been changed to Int RD in the latter
HCOB.]

EXTROVERSION, 1. extroversion means nothing more than
being able to look outward. An extroverted personality is one
who is capable of looking around the environment. A person whe
is capable of looking at the world around him and seeing it quite
real and quite bright is, of course, in a state of extroversion.
(HCOB 23 Jan 74RA) 2. the preclear ceasing to put his attention
on his mind, but putting his attention on the environment. We
see this happen often in the Opening Procedure of 8-C where the
preclear has the room suddenly become bright to him. He has
extroverted his attention. He has come free from one of these
communication tangles out of the past and has suddenly looked

at the environment. (Dn 55!, p. 94)

EXTROVERT, n. one whose available energy is being applied to

Extroversion
the world and people around him rather than being applied to
the past, or even to any great degree, the present. He does a lot
of future planning, a lot of action. Every effort is into the future.
(5112CM29B)

“Sirs

152
F

F, female; the E-meter basically registers the female body at 2.0
on the tone arm. When a preclear is Clear he may occasionally
get some tone arm motion due to purely body electronics but in
the main reads at male or female on the tone arm (3 or 2)
according to his or her sex. (EME, pp. 8 and 11)

FABRICATOR, see LIE FACTORY.
FAC, Foundation Auditor’s Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
FAC ONE, see FACSIMILE ONE.

F, fall. (HCOB 29 Apr 69)

FACSIMILE, 1. any mental picture, that is unknowingly created
and part of the time track is a facsimile, whether an engram,
secondary, lock or pleasure moment. (HCOB 15 May 63) 2. a
theta recording. All physical perceptions, all effort, emotion and
thought which a person experiences are recorded continuously,
and these recordings are called “facsimiles.” They are not
dependent upon an organism for their continued existence. Any
facsimile which has been recorded is there to be recalled—when
the individual has risen high enough on the tone scale, when he
has regained enough of his self-determinism. (Abid 114A) 3. an
energy picture made by a thetan or the body’s machinery of the

153
FACSIMILE BANK

physical universe environment. It is like a photograph. It is
made of mental energy. It means copy of the physical universe.
(PAB 99) 4. the pictures contained in the reactive mind. (Dn 55!,
p. 12) 5. a full facsimile is a sort of three-dimensional color
picture with sound and smell and all other perceptions plus the
conclusions or speculations of the individual. (HFP, p. 27) 6. a
simple word meaning a picture of a thing, a copy of a thing, not
the thing itself. (HF P, p. 25) 7. a facsimile is an energy picture
which can be reviewed again. A facsimile contains more than
fifty easily identified perceptions. It also contains emotion and
thought. (Sen 8-8008, p. 37) 8. means the physical universe
impression on thought and it means that section of thought
which has a physical universe impression on it and it has a time
tag on it. (5203CM03B)

FACSIMILE BANK, mental image pictures; the contents of the
reactive mind; colloquially, “bank.” (PXL, p. 52)

FACSIMILE ONE, 1. the basic on the service facsimile chain.
(HCL 15, 5203CM10) 2. it is called facsimile one because it is the
first proven-up whole track incident which, when audited out of
a long series of people, was found to alleviate such things as
asthma, sinus troubles, chronic chills and a host of other ills.
(HOM, p. 64) 3. the one basic engram on top of which all this life
engrams are mere locks. (HYLBTL? Gloss) Abbr. Fac One.

FACTORS, the Factors are the summation of the considerations
and examinations of the human spirit and the material universe
completed between A.D. 1923 and 1953. (COHA, p. 183)

FACTUAL HAVINGNESS, purpose: to remedy havingness objec-
tively. To bring about the preclear’s ability to have or not have,
his present time environment and to permit him to alter his
considerations of what he has, what he would continue and what
he would permit to vanish. (HCOB 3 Jul 59)

FADE-AWAY QUESTIONS, questions to which, because of the
characteristics of the mind, there is no possible answer. One of
these is “Give me an unknown time.” As soon as the preclear
starts to answer such a question, he of course has as-ised a
certain amount of unknownness and will know the time. The
answer to a fade-away question is measurable, however, it could

154
FALL

be said arbitrarily to be answered when the preclear has as-ised
enough unknownness to give a known time. There are relatively
few of these questions. (PAB 43)

FAILED CASE, 1. a case in which thought can always be over-
powered by mest. The pc’s inability to make his thinkingness
prevail against mest has failed too often and cannot change.
Only mest changes, therefore. This is usually the below zero on
the APA pe. (HCOB 9 Sept 57) 2. medically ill or injured cases.
(HCOB 12 Mar 69)

“FAILED” SESSIONS FORMULA, when you have an auditor
giving a failed session, you ASK THE PC WHAT THE
AUDITOR DID. Then you get a hold of the auditor and get it
corrected. You send the pe to review. (LRH ED 18 INT)

FAILURE, 1. at 0.0 on the tone scale, we have failure. It’s an
emotion. It’s just a little bit below apathy. It’s a realization that
one has failed. (5904C08) 2. a cycle of action which one thinks he
has completed which suddenly is demonstrated not to have been
completed. (2ACC-31B, 53812CM22) 3. the inability to handle that
which has been started after that course of action is entered.
(PDC 5)

Fall

FALL, 1. a type of E-meter read. (HCOB 23 Aug 65) 2. a
movement of the needle to your right as you face the meter. It
can take place anywhere on the dial. It can be a short movement

155
FALL ON HIS HEAD

or a long movement even necessitating adjustment of the tone
arm. The movement can be either fast or slow. (BIEM, p. 41)
3. also called a drop, a dip, and a register. It denotes that
a disagreement with life on which the preclear has greater
or lesser reality has met the question asked. (EME, p. 14)
4, fall (about one to two inches). (HCOB 29 Apr 69) Abor. F.

FALL ON HIS HEAD, Slang. this refers to the fact of a person
failing in one area or another. A pc “falls on his head” when he
has been improperly audited or attests to grades or actions he
has not really attained and then is continued on higher actions or
levels of auditing. An administrator falls on his head by failing
to handle situations and apply correct policy to an area he is
responsible for thereby causing the area and himself to fail. A
U.S. Western term meaning a person who has erred and fallen
from grace such as a horseman who is bucked off a horse. (LRH
Def. Notes)

FALSE, contrary to fact or truth; without grounds; incorrect.
Without meaning or sincerity; deceiving. Not keeping faith.
Treacherous. Resembling and being identified as a similar or
related entity. (HCO PL 3 May 72)

FALSE CLEAR, a preclear whose circuits have been charged to
the point where the auditor cannot find an engram and so
assumes that he has a Clear, when he does not. (SOS, Bk. 2, p.
272)

FALSE CLEAR READ, see DEAD THETAN.

FALSE FOUR, the laughter and gaiety which the preclear
exhibits when he has thoroughly exhausted an incident of
charge. There is nothing really “false” about false four, except
that it is often of very short duration. (SOS Gloss)

FALSE MOTIVATOR, when a person commits an overt or overt
of omission with no motivator, he tends to believe or pretends
that he has received a motivator which does not in fact exist.
This is a false motivator. (HCOB 1 Nov 68 II)

FALSE OVERTS, the person has been hit hard for no reason. So
they dream up reasons they were hit. (HCOB 1 Nov 68 II)

156
FAST FLOW

FALSE PIANOLA CASE, a case with dub-in circuitry. It is very
highly supercharged control circuitry. This person will run on
the track, go into this, or go into that, and can go on for years
and years. Evidently has very good recall. Has visio and sonic.
The only trouble is “I” isn’t even there. Sixty per cent of the
material he gives you is strictly dub-in. (VO7L, p. 67)

FALSE READ, 1. if a rud gets any comment, natter or protest or
bewilderment, put in false and clean it. “Has anyone said you
had a... when you didn’t have one?” is the answer to protested
ruds. (HCOB 15 Aug 69) 2. thinking something read which really
didn’t. Protest can then give you a read. Clean up questions
with “protest,” “suppress,” “invalidate” buttons where pe says
there’s nothing there. (BTB 6 Jun 68R)

FALSE SOLUTIONS, the pretended knowingness that you see on
the case. (SH Spec 438, 6108C22)

FALSE TA, two conditions in hands or feet can produce an
incorrect TA position. The dry condition produces a false high
TA. The overly wet condition produces a false low TA. The TA
depends on normally moist hands. This does not mean the meter
works on “sweat.” It does mean the meter works only when
there is correct electrical contact. (HCOB 23 Nov 73)

FALSE TA CHECKLIST, normally done early in auditing,
especially if TA high or low. Prevents unnecessary repair due to
wrong cans or grip. Is usually only done once. Do not suddenly
interject this action into the middle of a session nor change from
cans to footplates mid session due to TA going high. (BTB 11
Aug 72RA)

FALSE III, an OT who gaily went up the grades without doing
them. You don’t have to know more about it than that. (HCOB
24 May 69)

FALSE VALENCE, a personality which never existed. (PAB 95)

FAST FLOW, the student attests his theory or practical class
when he believes he has covered the materials and can do it.
There is no examination. (LRH ED 2 INT)

157
FAST FLOW STUDENT

FAST FLOW STUDENT, the fast flow student passes courses by
an attestation at Certs and Awards that he (a) enrolled properly
on the course, (b) has paid for the course (or signed a no-charge
invoice for 21/2 or 5 year contracted staff), (c) has studied and
understands all the materials on the checksheet, (d) has done
the drills called for by the checksheet, (e) can produce the result
required in the course materials. Twin checkouts are suspended.
Examinations are not required. (HCO PL 31 Aug 74 II)

FAT FOLDER, a lengthily audited case. (HCOB 6 Oct 70)

F.C., file clerk. (Hubbard Chart of Human Evaluation)

FC, Freedom Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

FC, Founding Church of Scientology. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

FCCI, Flag Case Completion Intensive. (BTB 22 Oct 72)

F.D., Fellow of Dianetics. (Scn Jour, Iss. 31-G)

FDN, Foundation. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

FEAR, 1. a condition of alertness for counter-efforts that threaten
survival. (HCL 7, 52083CM06A) 2. a fast uncontrolled flow. (PDC
8) 3. the emotion of fear and the dispersal of energy are one and

the same thing because the dispersal of energy makes one feel
like he wants to run away. (5208CM07C)

Fear \

FEAR MERCHANTS, see MERCHANTS OF FEAR.

FEELING SHUT-OFF, 1. a case which manifests no emotion or
cannot feel pain when emotion and pain should be present in
some incident is suffering from a “feeling” shut-off. (DMSMH,

158
FIFTH DYNAMIC

p. 319) 2. this most likely will be found in the prenatal area. The
word “feeling” means both pain and emotion: thus, the phrase “I
can’t feel anything,” may be an anesthetic for both. (DMSMH,
pp. 819-320) 3. a “feeling” shut-off can deny all somatics so that
the patient does not feel them. If the patient seems insensible to
trouble on the track, be sure that he has a feeling shut-off.
(DMSMH, p. 326)

FELLOW OF SCIENTOLOGY, this is an honorary award for
signal contributions to Sen technology beyond the scope of a new
process. The work must be complete and approved. Usually
reserved for a Class IV or V auditor. (HCO PL 12 Aug 63, Certs
and Awards )

FES, folder error summary. (BTB 3 Nov 72R)
FFD, full flow Dn. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-IR)

FFT, full flow table. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-IR) See DIANETIC
FLOW TABLE.

FIELD, 1. anything interposing between pc (thetan) and some-
thing he wishes to see, whether mest or mock-up. Fields are
black, grey, purple, any substance, or invisible. In any field a pc
was effect in an incident where he was being kept from going
away. As all fields are incidents, and as a pe is the one who
mocks up these incidents, all fields can be cleared by attaining
knowing cause. (HCOB 1 Feb 58)

FIELD AUDITOR, 1. anyone who is active in the field, profes-
sionally, is classified as “field auditor.” (HCOB 26 Oct 56) 2. a
field auditor professionally processes preclears up to his classifi-
cation but not power processes or above. He can run study
courses. (HCO PL 21 Oct 66 II)

FIFTEEN, 7. a designation to denote a finished case, solely for
case recording to designate a case advanced to current comple-
tion. This was a number system for preclears. A case is noted on
record by the act number to which it has been advanced. (HFP
Gloss)

FIFTH DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.

159
FIFTH INVADER FORCE

FIFTH INVADER FORCE, a thetan from the fifth invader force
believes himself to be a very strange insect-like creature with
unthinkably horrible hands. He believes himself to be occupying
such a body, but is in actuality simply a unit capable of
producing space, time, energy and matter. (Sen 8-8008, p. 182)

FIFTH STAGE RELEASE, see STAGES OF RELEASE.

FIGURE-FIGURE CASE, Slang. 1. somebody who will not ever
admit to having done something to anybody. The person cannot _
face any terminal subjectively for fear of having ruined it or for
fear of ruining it. (HCOB 3 Sept 59) 2. a person who is firmly
convinced he is a body and therefore is being a body always has
to have a reason for or a significance. Hence we get figure-
figure-figure. Given a fact there must always be a reason for the
fact. (PAB 24)

FILE CLERK, 1. Dn auditors’ slang for the mechanism of the
mind which acts as a data monitor. Auditors could get instant or
“flash” answers direct from the file clerk to aid in contacting
incidents. (PXL, pp. 207-208) 2. the file clerk is the bank
monitor. “He” monitors for both the reactive engram bank and
the standard banks. When he is asked for a datum by the
auditor or “I,” he will hand out a datum to the auditor via “I.” If
we had a big computing machine of the most modern design, it
would have a “memory bank” of punched cards or some such
thing and it would have to have a selector and feeder device to
thrust out the data the machine wants. The brain has one of
these—it could not operate without it. This is the bank
monitor—the file clerk. (DMSMH, p. 198) 3. a response
mechanism which is instantaneous. One could postulate that the
file clerk is a group of attention units with ready access to the
reactive mind and to the standard memory banks, and which in
common mental operation forwards data through to “I” as
memory. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 162)

FIRE, 1. v. rocket read. (HCOB 30 Mar 63) 2. the auditor must be
very sure of his rocket read. The correct RI will fire once when
the pe says it. (HCOB 13 May 63)

FIREFIGHT, the action of a quarrel between an auditor and a pe
is called a firefight. (HCOB 21 Apr 71RB)

160
FISHING A COGNITION

FIRST DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.

FIRST GOAL CLEAR, one GPM run gives a first goal clear.
(HCOB 9 Jul 63)

FIRST GPM, 1. the latest GPM on the track. (SH Spec 251,
6303C21) 2. meaning the first one contacted by the auditor,
always, not the earliest one on the track. (HCOB 30 Mar 63)

FIRST OVERT, would be the first overt on a chain of overts. (SH
Spec 84, 6612C13)

FIRST PHENOMENON, when a student misses understanding a
word, the section right after that word is a blank in his memory.
You can always trace back to the word just before the blank, get
it understood and find miraculously that the former blank area is
not now blank in the bulletin. The above is pure magic. (HCO
PL 24 Sept 64)

FIRST POSTULATE, not know. (PAB 66)

FIRST (1ST) STAGE RELEASED OT, if a being is a 1st, 2nd, or
8rd stage release and has also become exterior to his body in the
process, we simply add “OT” to the state of release. This is all
that is meant when a person is called a First Stage Released OT.
The person has not only come out of his bank but also out of his
body. (HCOB 12 Jul 65) See also STAGES OF RELEASE.

FIRST VALENCE, the preclear’s “own valence,” which is his own
concept of himself. (PAB 95)

FISH AND FUMBLE, cleaning a dirty needle. (HCOB 14 Jun 62)

FISHING A COGNITION, this is general ARC, answering the
preclear’s origin process. When the preclear experiences a
somatic, when he sighs, when he gives a reaction to a tone 40
process, the auditor repeats the process two or three more
times (random number) and then pausing the process asks the
preclear, “How are you doing now?” or “What is going on?” and
finds out what happened to the preclear just as though the
auditor has not noticed that the preclear had a reaction. The
auditor does not point out the reaction but merely wants a
discussion in general. During this discussion he brings the

161
5000 OHMS

preclear up to at least a cognition that the preclear has had a
somatic or a reaction and then merely continues the process
without further bridge. This is done randomly. It is not always
done every time the preclear experiences a reaction. (HCOB 11
Jun 57 Reissued 12 May 72)

5000 OHMS, the exact value for tone arm position 2 on the
E-meter. Ohms is the term used for the unit used in measuring
electrical resistance on a line. (EMD, p. 16A)

FIXED ATTENTION UNITS, attention units which are caught
somewhere down the time track in one incident or another in the
form of entheta. (HCOB 11 May 65)

FIXED IDEA, is something accepted without personal inspection
or agreement. (HCO PL 19 May 70)

FIXED THETA, entheta. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 10)

FLAG, the Church of Sen of California operates a marine mission
aboard a chartered vessel. This marine mission is commonly
referred to as Flag. It is operated under the aegis (protection,
support) of the Church of Scientology of California (BPL 9 Mar
74)

Flag

162
FLAT PROCESS

FLASH ANSWER, 1. the first flash response, the first impression
a person receives in answer to a question. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 51) 2.
instantaneous reply, the first thing that flashes into the
preclear’s mind at the snap of the auditor’s fingers. (SOS,
p. 104)

FLAT, meaning that the incident when “flat” has been discharged
of all bad consequences to the preclear. (HYLBTL? Gloss)

FLAT BALL BEARING, Slang. 1. a defective product; a nonoper-
ational person or thing. (PRD Gloss) 2. cases that don’t roll on
the assembly line of the HGC. Qual is wholly in the flat ball
bearing business. The HGC and Academy are wholly in the
assembly line business, dealing in fairly round ball bearings.
(HCOB 6 Aug 65)

FLAT BY TA, the test of “flat” is the TA moving only one-quarter
to one-eighth of a division up or down in twenty minutes of
auditing; not cumulative movement such as “the TA moves
1/16th twice so that’s 1/8th of a division—” This is wrong. If it
moves from 2.25 to 2.50 to 2.25 two or three times in twenty
minutes, this is called flat and has moved only one-quarter of a
TA division. This is right. (HCOB 23 May 61)

FLAT COMM LAG, 1. the point at which the auditing question or
command is no longer producing change of communication lag.
(PXL, p. 45) 2. a comm lag is flat when it is consistent. A person
may have an habitual lag of ten seconds. He may say everything
after a ten-second pause. (Abil SW)

FLAT METER, a cadmium cell meter discharges very suddenly
when it does go flat. In mid session the meter can run out of
battery. If the needle doesn’t snap to the right hard or if it
doesn’t quite get there on test, then that meter will go flat in
mid session and give false TA and no reads or TA on hot
subjects. (HCOB 24 Oct 71)

FLAT POINT (CCHs), three cycles with no change in comm lag,
no physically observed change, and the pe doing it. (BTB 12
Sept 63R)

FLAT PROCESS, 1. a process is continued as long as it produces
change and no longer, at which time the process is flat. (PXL,

163
FLAT QUESTION

p. 45) 2. a process is flat when 1) there is the same lag from the
moment the command is given until the time the preclear
answers the command at least three times in a row, 2) a
cognition occurs, 3) the tone arm action is flat, 4) a major
cognition occurs, 5) an ability regained. (SH Spec 290, 6307C25)
3. a question is flat when the communication lag has been similar
for three successive questions. Now, that’s a flat question. The
comm lag might be five seconds, five seconds, and five seconds.
We would still say with some justice that the question lag was
flat. However, the process lag would not be flat until the actual
normal exchange lag was present. The question would no longer
influence the communication factors of the preclear when the
process was flat. (Abil SW)

FLAT QUESTION, see FLAT PROCESS.

FLATTEN A PROCESS, 1. to continue a process as long as it
produces change and no longer. (Scn AD) 2. flattening some-
thing means to do it until it no longer produces a reaction.
(HCOB 2 Jun 71 I) See also END PHENOMENA.

FLIP-FLOPPING, a process by which the preclear’s excess
motion was taken off. We would say, “Mock up a man and make
him flip-flop,” and then make him insist that the body flip-flop
even further and even more wildly until he himself knew that he
was making the body flip-flop. We would do this with a woman's
body and would eventually take the motion off the case that was
inhibiting the preclear from controlling the body. This is actually
a motionectomy. (SCP, p. 15)

FLOATER, an engram which has not been restimulated in the
individual during the lifetime succeeding it. A floater has not
accumulated locks since it has not been restimulated. (DTOT, p.
45)

FLOATING NEEDLE, 1. the idle uninfluenced movement of the
needle on the dial without any patterns or reactions in it. It can
be as small as one inch or as large as dial wide. It does not fal] or
drop to the right of the dial. It moves to the left at the same
speed as it moves to the right. It is observed on a Mark V
E-meter calibrated with the TA between 2.0 and 3.0 with GIs in
on the pe. It can occur after a cognition, blowdown of the TA or

164
FLUB CATCH

just moves into floating. The pe may or may not voice the
cognition. (HCOB 7 May 69 V) 2. floating needles, free needles
are the same thing. Once you've seen one you'll never make a
mistake on one again. For it floats. It ceases to register on the
pe’s bank. It just idly floats about or won’t stand up even at low
sensitivity. The TA goes to any place between 2 and 3 and the
needle floats. (HCOB 2 Aug 65) Abbr. F/N.

FLOATING TA, the pc is so released the needle can’t be gotten
onto the dial. The needle is swinging wider than the meter dial
both ways from center and appears to lay first on one side and
then the other. The TA can’t be moved fast enough to keep the
extreme floating needle on the dial. (HCOB 24 Oct 71)

FLOW, 1. an impulse or direction of energy particles or thought
or masses between terminals. (HCOB 3 Feb 69) 2. the progress
of particles or impulses or waves from point A to point B. Flow
has the connotation of being somewhat directional. (SH Spec 84,
6612C13) 3. a progress of energy between two points. The points
may have masses. The points are fixed and the fixedness of the
points and their opposition produce the phenomena of flows.
(HCOB 1 Feb 62) 4. a change of position of particles in space.
(PDC 30) 5. any line of flow, whether contracting or length-
ening, is called a flow. A common manifestation is seen in an
electric light wire. (Scn 8-80, p. 43)

F-1, flow one, something happening to self. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-1R)
F-2, flow two, doing something to another. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-1R)

F-3, flow three, others doing things to others. (HCOB 4 Apr
71-1R)

F-0, flow zero, self doing something to self. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-1R)

FLUB, Slang. n. 1. an error. (HCOB 21 Aug 70) —v. 2. to blunder
or make a mess of. (BTB 3 Jui 73 I)

FLUBBED COMMANDS, commands used incorrectly. (HCOB 9
Aug 69)

FLUB CATCH, 1. to notice, intercept and handle after the fact of
the motion or action, a blunder or mistake being made. (BTB 3

165
FLUB CATCH SYSTEM

Jul 73 I) 2. flub=to blunder or make a mess of. Catch=to
intercept the motion or action of. It is a term coined and used to
cover that exact action. Flub catch=to notice, intercept and
handle after the fact of the motion or action, a blunder or
mistake being made. (BTB 3 Jul 73 I)

FLUB CATCH SYSTEM, 1. on Flag, an FES is carefully done so
as to detect areas of out tech in the world. This is called the
“Flub Catch System.” Auditors and C/Ses so detected are sent
to cramming in their areas to smooth out their tech, knowledge,
or TRs, all to improve delivery of tech. (HCOB 6 Oct 70) 2. flub
catch means that system which detects, orders and gets
corrected out tech. In other words, it catches the flub. (FO
2442R)

FLUNK, wv. 1. to make a mistake. Fail to apply the materials
learned. Opposite of pass. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III) —n. 1. in the
grading of sessions, a flunk is given when (1) the F/N did not
get to examiner and didn’t occur at session end, (2) major errors
or flubs occurred like no EP, multiple somatic, unflown ruds, etc.
(3) the C/S was not followed or completed, (4) Auditors’ Rights
listed errors occurred, (5) no F/N and BIs at examiner. (HCOB
21 Aug 70) 2. in TRs, if the student falters, comm lags, fumbles
a command or fails to get an execution on coach, coach says
“flunk” and they start at beginning of command cycle in which
error occurred. (HCOB 11 June 57)

FLYING NEEDLE, 1. an F/N that is a real F/N and so forth,
takes off, it flies. You can see it disconnect from the bank and
start to function. So it’s just a colloquialism; fly a needle, float a
needle, F/N, that’s all. (Class VIII No. 2) 2. an earlier
definition—a constant rise, constant rapid rise. (SH Spec 181,
6208C07)

F/N, floating needle or free needle. (HCOB 2 Aug 65)

F/NING AUDITOR, an auditor who is auditing well could be said
to be F/Ning the whole time. (HCOB 5 Oct 71)

F/NING LIST, meaning the whole list (all items and any added
ones) F/N throughout the assessment of the full list with no

166
FOOTPLATES

reads or slows in the F/N as all the items are called. (BTB 27 Jul
71 ID)

F/NING STUDENTS, 1. students who study well are said to be
F/Ning students. (HCOB 5 Oct 71) 2. one who is tearing along
successfully in his studies. (BTB 7 Feb 72RA II)

FOLDER, 1. a folded sheet of cardboard which encloses all the
session reports and other items. The folder is foolscap size, light
card, usually blue or green in color. (BTB 3 Nov 72R) 2. a
compilation of data—the records kept by an auditor. (Abil 218)

Folder

FOLDER ERROR SUMMARY, a summary of auditing errors in a
folder and on a pc’s case not corrected at the time the summary
is done. (BTB 3 Nov 72R) Abbr. FES.

FOLDER SUMMARY, the folder summary is kept up every
session by the auditor and is stapled to the left inside front
cover of the folder as a running summary for C/S use. The
folder summary is made up of all actions in consecutive date
order and showing what was run plus the result at end of
process, session time, admin time and exam result—F/N, VGIs
or BER. (BTB 5 Nov 72R III) Abbr. F/S.

FOOTPLATES, metal footplates connected to the meter and the
pe barefooted in session to handle false TA. (HCOB 24 Oct 71)

167
FORCE

Force (Def. 2)

FORCE, 1. random effort. (Sen 0-8, p. 75) 2. energy with some
direction. (PDC 56) 3. force of course is made up of time,
matter, energy, flows, particles, masses, solids, liquids, gasses,
space and locations. (HCOB 16 Jun 70)

FORCE FIELD, actually nothing more or less than wave emana-
tion like you get out of the headlight of a car. You change the
wave-length of the headlight of a car and speed it up enough and
hit somebody with it, it'll knock him down. That’s an electronic
field. That’s a force screen. (5206CM28A)

FORCE SCREEN, see FORCE FIELD. (5206CM28A)

FORGET, 1. forget is a harmonic of not know. (SH Spec 14,
6106C14) 2. an occlusion of observation. (SH Spec 58, 6109C26)

FORGETFULNESS, 1. rapidity of change oi state, unpredicted.
(HCOB 17 Mar 60) 2. an individual starts to forget when he’s lost
too much. He just dramatizes loss, too bad to remember.
(HCAP-8, 5411C29)

FORGETTER, 1. a forgetter mechanism is “Put it out of my
mind,” “If I remembered it I would go mad,” “Can’t remember,”

168
FOUR FLOWS

and just plain “I don’t know,” as well as the master of the family
of phrases, “Forget it!” All bar information from the analyzer. A
whole case, freshly opened, may keep answering everything
with one of these denyers. A forgetter, used by an ally, all by
itself and with practically no pain or emotion present will
submerge data which, in recall, would not be aberrative but
which, so buried—by a forgetter— makes things said just before
it aberrative and literal. (DMSMH, p. 270) 2. any engram
command which makes the individual believe he can’t remem-
ber. (NOTL Gloss)

FORGETTING, the process of not knowing the past. (FOT, p. 85)

FORMAL AUDITING, 1. control by ARC. ARC formal auditing is
not chatty or yap-yap, but it is itself. It has warmth, humanity,
understanding and interest in it. (HCOB 2 Apr 58) 2. auditing
done by use of model session and exact TRs. (LRH Def. Notes)

FORMULA, a method of getting a case started. The numbers are
in order of development, not case level. (HCOB 1 Dec 60)

FORMULA H, the effort to reach and withdraw, to grasp, and let
go of oneself, of others for themselves, of oneself, for others and
others for oneself and others for others: For force, perception
and admiration when run resolve the tenacity of engrams.
Formula H is called Formula H because the H stands for hope.
(PAB 9)

FORMULA 19, F19 (a process name). (BTB 20 Aug 71 II)

FOUNDING SCIENTOLOGIST, if you were with Sen before 1964
you were an old-timer, a Founding Scientologist. (HCO PL 5
Feb 64)

40 (as in GF +40), the addition no. 40 items are the original seven
resistive cases. (HCOB 10 Jun 71 I)

4.0, a 4.0 on the tone scale is, by definition, one who has had all
entheta in his current life converted to theta. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 120)

FOUR FLOWS, see QUAD FLOWS.
169
IV RUNDOWN

IV RUNDOWN, originally developed to catch cases that had
somehow gotten up to OT III and were falling on their heads. It
is a collection of actions. [See the referenced HCOB for full
explanation and use of this rundown.] (HCOB 30 Jun 70R)

FOURTH DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.

FOURTH DYNAMIC ENGRAM, 1. the basic aberration of the
planet. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. the humanitarian objective is to
make a safe environment in which the fourth dynamic engram
can be audited out. By engram we mean the mental block that
prevents peace and tolerance. By fourth dynamic we mean that
impulse to survive as mankind instead of just individuals. (Ron's
Jour 68)

FOURTH FLOW, flow 0. (HCOB 7 Mar 71)
FOURTH POSTULATE, remember. (PAB 66)

FOURTH STAGE RELEASE, to obtain Fourth Stage Release one
has to take the lock end words off the R6 bank. (HCOB
5 Aug 65)

FOUR UNIVERSES, the four are: thetan or spirit, mind or brain,
body or male body or female body, and physical universe or

“earth or continent or town or house or dwelling. (HCOB 29
Sept 59)

FRAGILE TA, 1. TA susceptible to being stuck high or stuck low
or stuck dead thetan. (SH Spec 302A, 6309C03) 2. just one
wrong date or duration in R3R or just one wrong RI in R38N and
tone arm action ceases, the TA going way up or down and
staying there. (HCOB 28 Jul 63)

FRANCHISE, now termed mission; a group granted the privilege
of delivering elementary Scn and Dn services. Does not have
church status or rights. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

FRANCHISE HOLDER, a professional auditor with a classifica-
tion to Level III or over who practices Scientology full or part
time for remuneration, who conducts processing and training
privately or to groups, whose understanding and experience of
Dn and Sen is sufficiently broad for him to be publicized to

170
FREEZE

others as a stable terminal, who has signed a franchise agree-
ment, who receives bulletins, policy letters, advice, advertising,
technical information, services and administrative data and who
in return for same maintains regularly a weekly report and a
weekly tithe to the church. (HCO PL 2 Jan 65)

FREEDOM, 1. ability to create and position energy or matter in
time and space. (Scn 8-8008 Gloss) 2. the absence of barriers.
(Dn 55!, p. 55) 3. lots of space, and ability to use it. (PDC 35)
4, the component parts of freedom, as we first gaze upon it, are
then: affinity, reality, and communicaton, which summate into
understanding. Once understanding is attained freedom is
obtained. (Abil Mi 258)

FREEDOM RELEASE, expanded Grade III release. (CG&AC)
See GRADE IV RELEASE.

FREE NEEDLE, see FLOATING NEEDLE.

FREE NEEDLE-ITIS, Slang. the auditor who is so unsure of
what a floating needle is and whose TRs and basics are out, calls
floating needles all over the place on the pc, when the needle is
in fact not floating is said to have free needle-itis. [tis means,
properly, an inflammatory disease. It is used to indicate
“obsession with” or a mental obsession. In this case, it would
mean an auditor who is obsessed with calling free needles
(floating needles) on the E-meter when they don’t exist. (LRH
Def. Notes)

FREE THETA, attention units free enough to be directed of your
own volition. (Sen Jour 18-G)

FREE THETAN, was somebody who was free of a body. He
wasn’t free of organizational commitments or ethics but he was
free of a body, he didn’t require any body. (SH Spec 268,
6305C23)

FREE TRACK, that part of the time track that is free of pain and
misadventure is simply called the free track, in that the pc
doesn’t freeze up on it. (HCOB 15 May 63)

FREEZE, stand completely still. (LRH Def. Notes)

171
FREEZES

FREEZES, in CCHs freezes may be introduced at end of cycle,
this being after the “Thank you” and before the next command,
maintaining a solid comm line, to ascertain information from the
coach or to bridge from the process. (HCOB 5 Jul 63)

F/S, folder summary. (BTB 23 Sept 71)

F. SCN, Fellow of Scientology. F. Sen is not an auditing degree. It
is an honorary award extended by the HASI for spectacular
contribution to the science itself. The F. Sen award carries with
it the specific addition to the science for which the rating was
awarded. An F. Sen is not necessarily a skilled or degreed
auditor. (Sen Jour, Iss 31-G)

FULL FLOW DIANETICS, all former Dianetic items ever run are
listed and what flows have been run on them and to what end
phenomena. Such a list is then handled from the earliest forward
by A) completing the bogged flow and B) completing the missing
flow if it reads. (HCOB 7 Mar 71)

FULL RESPONSIBILITY, the willingness to mock or unmock
barriers at will. (2ACC-4B, 5811CM18)

FUTURE, on the time track, that area later than present time.
Perception of the future is postulated as a possibility. The
creation of future realities through imagination is a recognized
function. (SOS Gloss)

172
G

GAEs, gross auditing errors. (HCOB 21 Sept 65)

GAINS, see ABILITY GAIN, INTELLIGENCE GAIN and CASE
GAIN.

GALACTIC CONFEDERACY, the former political unit of which
the solar system was a part. (LRH Def. Notes)

GAME, 1. any state of beingness wherein exist awareness,
problems, havingness and freedom (separateness) each in some
degree. (PAB 73) 2. a contest of person against person, or team
against team. (PAB 84) 3. all games are continuing by definition,
since an unstarted game isn’t a game and a finished game isn’t a
game. (PAB 101) 4. a game consists of freedoms, barriers, and
purposes. (POW, p. 60)

GAME CONDITIONS, game conditions are: attention, identity,
effect on opponents, no-effect on self, can’t have on opponents
and goals and their areas, have on tools of play, own goals and
field, purpose, problems of play, self-determinism, opponents,
the possibility of loss, the possibility of winning, communication,
non-arrival. (FOT, pp. 93-94)

173
GAMES CONDITION

Game (Def. 2)

GAMES CONDITION, 1. when you say games condition you mean
that somebody’s power of choice has been subjugated against his
will into a fixated activity from which he must not take his
attention. (SH Spec 32, 6107C20) 2. the word games condition is
a derogatory actually. There is a technical thing goes along.
When you say games condition you mean a package, and the
package has to do with this: It means a fixated attention, an
inability to escape coupled with an inability to attack, to the
exclusion of other games. There is nothing wrong with having
games. There is a lot wrong with being in a games condition
because it is unknown, it is an aberrated activity, it is reactive,
and one is performing it way outside of his power of choice and
without his consent or will. (SH Spec 32, 6107C20) 3. have for
self and can’t have for others; now that is a true games
condition. (SH Spec 32, 6107C20) Abbr. G.C.

GAMES CONDITION PROCESS, when you say games condition
process you mean that it is an interchangeable negative bracket.
In other words, it’s interchanged between Person A and Person
B, or Person B and Person C, and Person C and Person D. It is
basically a denial of interchange. (SH Spec 32, 6107C20)

174
GENETIC ENTITY

GARBAGE, Slang. 1. the term garbage isn’t used much more but
it meant dub-in. (5009CM23B) 2. garbage was technically called
delusion in the philosophic work of Dn but the term is too harsh
and critical, for who has not some misconception of a past
incident? (DMSMH, p. 191)

G.C., games condition. (HCOB 20 Aug 56)
GE, genetic entity. (PDC 43)

GENERALITY, 1. a general or nonspecific statement which is
applicable to all and used in Sen to connotate a statement made
in an effort to either hide cause or to overwhelm another person
with the all-inclusive. (HCOB 11 May 65) 2. any unspecifity or
unspecific statement or indication tends toward a generality. It
is the substitute of a plural for a singular. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)
3. multiple subject, not specific, such as “dogs” or “the public.”
(BCR, p. A-4)

GENERAL O/W (OVERT-WITHHOLD), “What have you done?”
“What have you withheld?” (HCOB 3 Jul 62)

GENERAL TRs, are for use in regular auditing. They are natural,
relaxed, while fully controlling the session and the pc. (BTB 13
Mar 75)

GENETIC, by line of protoplasm and by facsimiles and by mest
forms the individual has arrived in the present age from a past
beginning. Genetic applies to the protoplasm line of father and
mother to child, grown child to new child and so forth. (HFP
Gloss)

GENETIC BEING, see GENETIC ENTITY.

GENETIC BLUEPRINT, 1. the facsimiles of the evolutionary line.
(HFP, p. 28) 2. the plans of construction of a new body in the
orthodox manner of conception, birth, and growth. (HFP, p. 76)

GENETIC ENTITY, 1. that beingness not dissimilar to the thetan
which has carried forward and developed the body from its
earliest moments along the evolutionary line on earth and
which, through experience, necessity and natural selection, has

175
GENETIC INSANITY

employed the counter-efforts of the environment to fashion an
organism of the type best fitted for survival, limited only by the
abilities of the genetic entity. The goal of the genetic entity is
survival on a much grosser plane of materiality. (Sen 8-8008, p.
8) 2. formerly referred to as the somatic mind. It has no real
personality, it is not the “I” of the body. This is the “mind” of an
animal, a dog or a cat or a cow. (HOM, pp. 18-14) 3. that entity
which is carrying along through time, that is making the body
through the time stream, through the action of sex and so forth.
(5410C10D) Abbr. GE.

GENETIC INSANITY, genetic insanity is limited to the case of
actually missing parts. A very small percentage of insanity falls
into such a category and its manifestation is mental dullness or
failure to coordinate and beyond these has no aberrative quality
whatever. (DMSMG, p. 134)

GENETIC LINE, 1. the genetic line consists of the total of
incidents which have occurred during the evolution of the mest
body itself. The composite of these facsimiles has the semblance
of a being. This being would be called the genetic entity or the
GE. The GE is not an actual individual but a composite, of
individualities assumed in the single lives along the evolutionary
track. (HOM, p. 23) 2. protoplasm line. Its cycle is preconcep-
tion, conception, birth, procreation, preconception and so on.
That unending string of protoplasm goes through earth time.
(HCL 15, 52083CM10A) 3. a series of mocked up automaticities
which produce according to a certain blueprint from the earliest
times of life on this planet through until now. (PAB 180)

GENETIC PERSONALITY, personal characteristics and tend-
encies derived from the three inheritance sources (mest, organic
line, theta). This might be said to be basic personality, or the
core of basic personality. (SOS Gloss)

GEN NON-REMIMEO, [designation on HCO Policy Letters and
HCO Bulletins indicates dissemination and restriction as fol-
lows:] All Saint Hill Staff, eight duplicated copies only are sent
to each organization. (HCO PL 25 Jan 66)

GEOGRAPHICAL ANTIPATHIES, pain and unconsciousness
have taken place at some point on the globe, some city, some
ocean, some altitude, some depth. Afterwards, he avoids such a
point. (PAB 9)

176
GLEE OF INSANITY

GF, green form. (HCOB 6 Mar 71 I)
GF40RB, expanded green form forty revised. See GF40XRR.

GF40XRR, (green form forty expanded, revised, revised), a
correction list used to handle resistive cases (TA in normal
range but not responding well to auditing). Assess M3 with all
reading items taken to F/N per instructions, then handled in
depth with L&N and R3R processes. Normally done only once if
done properly. EP is all reading items handled, pe no longer
resistive and making good progress in auditing. Note that a pe
can be made to appear resistive by poor basic auditing and
failure to use the right correction list when needed. (BTB 11
Aug 72R) 2. this correction list was further revised in December
1974 and renumbered as Expanded GF40RB (HCOB 30 Jun 71R)

GF MS, goals finder model session. (HCO PL 8 Dec 62)
GIs, good indicators. (HCOB 9 May 69 II)

GITA, give and take processing. Expanded Gita was developed
from phenomena discovered after I developed creative proc-
essing. It was originally plain Give and TAke processing, hence
the Gita. (PAB 16)

GLEE, a kind of insanity. Glee is a special kind of embarrassed
giggling. You'll know it when you see it. When you see glee on
some fellow on a post, realize it’s because he doesn’t understand
what he’s doing. He’s ignorant about something and above that
is confusion and above the confusion is glee. (HCOB 20 Sept 68)

GLEE OF INSANITY, 1. a specialized case of irresponsibility. A
thetan who cannot be killed and yet can be punished has only
one answer to those punishing him and that is to demonstrate to
them that he is no longer capable of force or action and is no
longer responsible. He therefore states that he is insane and
demonstrates that he cannot possibly harm them as he lacks any
further rationality. This is the root and basis of insanity. (Sen
8-8008,' p. 55) 2. also called the “glee of irresponsibility.”
Manifestation which takes the form of an actual wave emanation
resulting basically from the individual dramatizing the condition
of “must reach—can’t reach, must withdraw—can’t withdraw.”
(PXL Gloss)

177
GLIBIDITY

GLIBIDITY, Slang. a condition in which a person gives very glib
answers. (SH Spec 41, 6409C29)

GLIB STUDENT, one who can confront the words and ideas. He
cannot confront the physical universe or people around him and
so cannot apply. He does not see mest or people. The reason for
this is that he is below nonexistence on one or more dynamics
and so cannot align with the others. (HCOB 26 Apr 72)

GLUM AREA, that area which when the pc is supposedly
“itsaing” about it, makes him glum and the TA rise, indicating
that a service facsimile is doing the confronting on that area and
not the pe. (HCOB 16 Oct 63)

GMTH, CCH-1 is known as “Give me that hand.” (PAB 133)

GOAL, 1. the prime postulate. It is the prime intention. It is a
basic purpose for any cycle of lives the pe has lived. (SH Spec
160, 6206C12) 2. a solution to the problems which have been
given the person usually by terminals. (SH Spec 5, 6106C01)
3. the signficance which surrounds the terminal. (SH Spec 5,
6106C01) 4. a whole track long-term matter. (HCO PL 6 Dec 70)

GOAL OF DIANETICS, a world without insanity, without crimi-
nals and without war—this is the goal of Dn. (SOS, p. v)

GOAL OF LIFE, the goal of life can be considered to be infinite
survival. Man, as a life form, can be demonstrated to obey in all
his actions and purposes the one command: “SURVIVE!”
(DMSMH, p. 19)

GOAL OF PROCESSING, to bring an individual into such
thorough communication with the physical universe that he can
regain the power and ability of his own postulates. (COHA,
p. xi)

GOAL SERIES, the actual goals in their sequence and pattern
that repeats over and over forward through time. (HCOB 138
Apr 64, Sen VI Part One Glossary of Terms)

GOALS FINDER, 1. a person in an organization who has no other
post or activity of any kind. He is simply Goals Finder and keeps
more or less regular auditing hours. The Goals Finder finds

178
GOALS PROBLEM MASS

goals of staff members when they are ready. (HCO PL 10 Sept
62) 2. the title Goals Finder is changed herewith to “A Clearing
Consultant.” (HCO PL 11 Apr 63) [The above are quoted from
HCO PLs of the referenced date, however, the post of Goals
Finder does not exist as such in today’s Church of Scientology.]

GOALS FINDER MODEL SESSION, where the pc has been well
prepchecked and is well under auditor control, a goal finder in
an R-3GA session may omit rudiments in model session, using
only goals for session, and havingness, goals and gains at end
and general O/W mid ruds and random ruds where needed in
the session. (HCOB 15 Oct 62)

GOALS LIST, a full list of goals including childhood goals,
withheld goals, antisocial goals, and (by meter reaction on
question) “Any goal you have not told me about.” Auditor gets
every possible goal until the meter is null on the question of
goals the pc might have. (HCOB 6 Apr 61)

GOALS PLOT, the pattern of the pc’s actual goals. (HCOB 13 Apr
64, Sen VI Part One Glossary of Terms)

GOALS PROBLEM MASS, 1. the goal has been balked for eons
by opposing forces. The goal pointed one way, the opposing
forces point exactly opposite and against it. If you took two fire
hoses and pointed them at each other, their streams would not
reach each other’s nozzles, but would splatter against one
another in midair. If this splatter were to hang there, it would
be a ball of messed up water. Call hose A the force the pc has
used to execute his goal. Call hose B the force other dynamics
have used to oppose that goal. Where these two forces have
perpetually met, a mental mass is created. This is the picture of
any problem—force opposing force with resultant mass. Where
the pe’s goal meets constant opposition, you have in the reac-
tive mind the resultant mass caused by the two forces—
Goal=force of getting it done, Opposition=force opposing it
getting done. This is the goal problem mass. (HCOB 20 Nov 61)
2. is fundamentally founded on a goal. They’re a conglomeration
of identities which are counter-opposed, and these identities are
hung up on the postulate-counter-postulate of a problem. (SH
Spec 248, 6302C26) 3. constituted of items, beingnesses, that the

179
GOALS TERMINAL

person has been and has fought. (SH Spec 137, 6204C24) 4. the
problem created by two or more opposing ideas which being
opposed, balanced, and unresolved, make a mass. It’s a mental
energy mass. (SH Spec 83, 6612C06) 5. items (valences) in
opposition to one another. Any pair of these items, in opposition
to each other, constitute a specific problem. (HCOB 23 Nov 62)

GOALS TERMINAL, something that epitomizes both the goal and
the resistive modifier. (SH Spec 76, 6111007)

GOES THROUGH 7, around the whole TA dial and back up.
(HCOB 20 Aug 63)

GO IN, to go in; the act of the verb interiorizing. (HCOB 4
Jan 71 II).

GOING UP THE POLE, Slang. that’s when somebody doesn’t
even begin to handle energy, but he just suddenly somehow or
other latches onto about 40.0 and goes out the top and still holds
onto the mest body on the bottom and he’s done the incredible
thing of making a circle out of all this. He’s joined 0.0 up against
40.0 and to listen to the guy and to talk to the guy you couldn’t
really tell whether he’s ecstatically alive or fatally dead. (PDC
27)

GOOD AUDITOR, one who knows Sen and its techniques and who
audits with all basics in. (Aud 1 UK)

GOOD AUTOMATICITY, that which raised the self-determinism
of others and let them more and more on a rising scale, think,
act and provide for themselves. (PDC 21)

GOOD CASE CONDITION, attained the level of case for which
the church is classified and now in training during staff study
time for admin or tech certification. (HCO PL 21 Oct 73R)

GOOD CONDUCT, to do only those things which others can
experience. (HCOB 1 Mar 59)

GOOD/EVIL, for the purpose of Dn and Sen good and evil must
be defined. Those things which may be classified as good by an
individual are only those things which aid himself, his family, his
group, his race, mankind or life in its dynamic obedience to the

180
GOVERNOR

command, modified by the observations of the individual, his
family, his group, his race, or life. As evil, may be classified
those things which tend to limit the dynamic thrust of the
individual, his family, his group, his race, or life in general in
the dynamic drive, also limited by the observation, the observer
and his ability to observe. Good may be defined as constructive.
Evil may be defined as destructive—definitions modified by
viewpoint. (DTOT, p. 21)

GOOD INDICATORS, 1. what you are treating is getting better,
by which we mean, less present; betterness to us is less present,
his bad ankle is getting better. We mean the badness of the
ankle is less present so that’s a good indicator. How much less
present, is the degree of the goodness of the indicator. (SH Spec
3, 6401C09) 2. those indicators of a person (or group) indicating
that the person is doing well, e.g. fast progress, high production
statistics, person happy, winning, cogniting, are said to be good
indicators. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) Abbr. Gls.

ow,
——

PC} Good Indicators (Def. 2)

GOOD PHYSICAL CONDITION, not suffering from physical
illness, not PTS, not currently physically damaged by accident.
(HCO PL 21 Oct 73R)

GOVERNOR, mentioned in a lecture in the autumn of 1951. The
speed of a preclear is the speed of his production of energy. The

181
G PLUS M

most important step in establishing a preclear’s self-deter-
minism, the goal of the auditor, is the rehabilitation of the
preclear’s ability to produce energy. (Scn 8-80, p. 33)

G PLUS M, goal plus modifier. (SH Spec 90, 6112C07)

GPM, goals problem mass. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
GRAD, Graduate. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

GRADATION, it means there are grades, as to a road, or steps
which are a gradual grade up. (Aud 107 ASHO)

GRADATION CHART, see CLASSIFICATION GRADATION
AND AWARENESS CHART.

GRADE, 1. the word used to describe the attainment of level
achieved by a preclear. Grade is the personal points of progress
on the bridge. A preclear is Grade 0, I, II, III, IV, V, VA or VI
depending on the technology successfully applied. (Aud 72 UK)
2. a series of processes culminating in an exact ability attained,
examined and attested to by the pc. (HCOB 23 Aug 71) 3. grade
and level are the same but when one has a grade one is a pe and
when one has a level one is studying its data. (HCOB 2 Apr 65)

GRADE 0, Communications Release. Ability to communicate
freely with anyone on any subject. (CG&AC75)

GRADE I, Problems Release. Ability to recognize the source of
problems and make them vanish. (CG&AC75)

GRADE II, Relief Release. Relief from hostilities and the suffer-
ings of life. (CG&AC75)

GRADE Il, Freedom Release. Freedom from the upsets of the
past and ability to face the future. (CG&AC75)

GRADE IV, Ability Release. Moving out of fixed conditions and
gaining abilities to do new things. (CG&AC75)

GRADE V, Power Release. Ability to handle power. (CG&AC75)

GRADE VA, Power Plus Release. Recovery of knowledge.
(CG&AC75)

GRADE VI, Whole Track Release. Return of powers to act on
own determinism. (CG&AC75)

182
GRADIENT SCALE

GRADE VII, Clear. Ability to be at cause over mental matter,
energy, space, and time on the first dynamic (survival for self).
(CG&AC75)

GRADIENT, 1. a gradual approach to something, taken step by
step, level by level, each step or level being, of itself, easily
surmountable—so that, finally, quite complicated and difficult
activities or high states of being can be achieved with relative
ease. This principle is applied to both Sen processing and
training. (Scn AD) 2. a steepening or an increasing from the
slight to the heavy. (HCOB 3 Apr 66) 3. the essence of a
gradient is just being able to do a little bit more and a little bit
more and a little bit more until you finally make the grade. (Sen
0-8, p. 15)

Gradient (Def. 1, 2)

GRADIENT SCALE, 1. the term can apply to anything, and
means a scale of condition graduated from zero to infinity.
Absolutes are considered to be unobtainable. (Scn 8-8008,
p. 104) 2. the tool of infinity-valued logic. It is a tenet of Dn and
Sen that absolutes are unattainable. Terms like good and bad,
alive and dead, right and wrong are used only in conjunction
with gradient scales. On the scale of right and wrong, every-
thing above zero or center would be more and more right,
approaching an infinite rightness, and everything below zero or
center would be more and more wrong, approaching an infinite
wrongness. The gradient scale is a way of thinking about the
universe which approximates the actual conditions of the uni-
verse more closely than any other existing logical method.
(SOS Gloss)

183
GRADIENTS OF CASES

GRADIENTS OF CASES, the degree to which the person is
overwhelmed by the bank. (SH Spec 46, 6108C29)

GRAND TOUR, 1. the process R1-9 in The Creation of Human
Ability. (PXL Gloss) 2. Grand Tour is the Route 1 or exterior-
ized version of Spotting Spots. The auditor asks the preclear to
be in a spot of a certain description, such as his home town, asks
him to be in the auditing room, asks him to be in his home town,
asks him to be in the auditing room. (PAB 51) 3. a very simple
process. What you do is run change of space with enough
interesting locales in it, to show the pe that he can choose
around a great deal of universe and look at a great many things.
(5410CM10C) 4. a process used on an exteriorized thetan to free
him from the craving for mass and to bring into present time a
greater portion of the mest universe. (COHA Gloss)

GRANT BEINGNESS, the ability to assume or grant (give, allow)
beingness is probably the highest of human virtues. It is even
more important to be able to permit (allow) other people to have
beingness than to be able oneself to assume it. (FOT, p. 27)

GREASING THE TRACK, merely by running the preclear
through various parts of his life, up and down the track, the
auditor may relieve enough anaten and misemotion from the
case to permit somatics to occur. This was once upon a time
known as “greasing the track.” However one should not run a
preclear into a somatic unless one intends to reduce it or to
discover the basic on the chain and reduce that. (SOS, p. 84)

GREASY ON THE TRACK, Siang. attention of the pe hard to
control. (SH Spec 302A, 6809C03)

GREEN FORM, 1. used for general case cleanup particularly on
an out-rud type pe or when ruds won't fly. It is not used to
handle high or low TA. Assessed M5 to provide data for the C/S
then each read handled in accordance with C/S Series 44R. EP
is each read handled to its EP. May be reassessed after handling
all reading items if heavily charged on first assessment. Can also
be done M8 to a good win and F/N VGIs. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)
2. in HGC the Green Form is done on the order of the case
supervisor to detect reasons for case trouble; prepared list.
(HCO PL 7 Apr 70RA) Abbr. GF.

GREEN SHEET, an Expanded Dianetics program is written on a
green sheet. (BTB 6 Nov 72R II)

184
GRINDING

GR ENG INT, group engram intensive. (HCOB 5 May 70)

GRIEF, 1. a ridge and is occasioned by loss. (Sen 8-8008, p. 21)
2. 0.5 on the tone scale. (SOS, p. 57) 3. Grief takes place where
one recognizes his loss and failure as in the death of somebody
he loved and tried to help. (HFP, p. 85)

Cc

Grief

GRIEF CHARGE, an outburst of tears that may continue for a
considerable time, in a session, after which the preclear feels
greatly relieved. This is occasioned by the discharge of grief or
painful emotion from a secondary. (Scn AD)

GRINDING, 1. charge is held in place by the basie on a chain.
When only later than basic incidents are run charge can be
restimulated and then bottled up again with a very small
amount blown. This is known as “grinding out” an incident. An
engram is getting run, but as it is not basic on a chain, no
adequate amount of charge is being relieved. (HCOB 8 Jun 63)
2. going over and over and over and over a lock, secondary or
engram without obtaining an actual erasure. The Dn auditor
who puts the pe through an incident four or five times without
erasure or appreciable reduction is encountering “grinding.”
(HCOB 1 May 69) 3. a level below ARC breaking. A pe who just
sits there and grinds is very often not up to getting ARC
broken. (SH Spec 66, 6110C12)

185
GROOVE IN THE QUESTION

GROOVE IN THE QUESTION, there are a variety of ways to do
this, e.g., ask what the question means, what period or time the
question covers, what activities would be included, where the pc
has been that might be something to do with the question. If any
other people are likely to be involved. In other words, you are
steering the pc’s attention to various parts of his bank and
getting him to have a preliminary look. When this has been done
using very good TR-1, you give him the question again. (BTB 18
Dec 72)

GROSS AUDITING ERRORS, the five gross auditing errors are:
(1) can’t handle and read an E-meter; (2) doesn’t know and can’t
apply technical data; (3) can’t get and keep a pc in session; (4)
can’t complete an auditing cycle; (5) can’t complete a repetitive
auditing cycle (including repeating a command long enough to
flatten a process). (HCOB 21 Sept 65) Abbr. GAEs.

GROUP ANALYTICAL MIND, the true analytical mind of the
group is the composite of the analytical minds of the members of
the group as guided by the rationale and ethics which initially
founded the group or which it has developed into a culture.
(NOTL, p. 137)

GROUP AUDITOR, 1. one who stands in front of, sits in front of,
or relays by loudspeaker system to a group (and a group
consists of two or more people), auditing, so as to improve their
condition of beingness as thetans. (PXL, p. 284) 2. a group
auditor is one who administers techniques, usually already
codified, to groups of children or adults. (GAH, p. i)

GROUP AUDITOR’S HANDBOOK, this was a 1954 compilation of
group auditing sessions resulting from the Advanced Clinical
Courses of that year. (PXL, p. 288)

GROUP BANK, see GROUP ENGRAM.

GROUPED, meaning everything in the same place. (21ACC-5,
5901C30)

GROUP ENGRAM, 1. each time instantaneous action is demanded
of the group by compressed time situations, and commands are
given by the selected individual or individuals to cope with those

186
GROUP PROCESSING

moments of emergency, it can be observed that an engram has
been implanted in the group. The instantaneous orders and
commands are indicators of an engram. The engram actually
was received during a moment of shock when the ideals, ethics,
rationale and general thought and energy of the group collided
forcefully with mest. (NOTL, p. 132) 2. a group is composed of
individuals. If they have a group engram, it only has force
because of basics on that subject in their banks. Thus, if they
are cleaned up on the general subject, the general group engram
should blow off and disappear. (HCOB 27 Feb 70)

GROUP ENGRAM INTENSIVE, this is a process run to help a
Scientology Church. A group is composed of individuals. If they
have a group engram it only has force because of basics on that
subject in their banks. Thus, if they are cleaned up on the
general subject, the general group engram should blow off and
disappear. This is done on every member of the group. Listing,
nulling and TRs must be flawless. (HCOB 27 Feb 70)

GROUPER, 1. species of command which, literally translated,
means that all incidents are in one place on the time track: “I’m
jammed up,” “Everything happens at once,” “Everything comes
in on me at once,” “I'll get even with you,” etc. (DMSMH, p.
213) 2. anything which pulls the time track into a bunch at one
or more points. When the grouper is gone the time track is
perceived to be straight. (HCOB 15 May 63) 3. is a number of
incidents becoming located apparently in one time instant. (SH
Spec 56, 6109C20) 4. action phrase which would tend to bunch all
incidents in one place, creates the illusion that the time track is
collapsed and that all incidents are at the same point in time.
Example: “Pull yourself together,” “It all happens at once.”
(SOS, p. 103)

GROUP PROCESSING, techniques, usually already codified, ad-
ministered to groups of children or adults. The group (preclears)
is usually assembled and seated in a quiet room where they will
not be disturbed by sudden noises or entrances. The group
auditor then takes his position in the front of the group and talks
to them briefly about what he is going to do and what he expects
them to do. The auditor then begins with his first command.
(GAH, p. i)

187
GROUP REACTIVE MIND

GROUP REACTIVE MIND, could be considered to lie in the
actions of those individuals set up for emergency status during
compressed time emergencies, which is to say, the reactive
mind is composed of the composite engrams of the group itself.
(NOTL, p. 136)

GROUP THETA, the theta of a group would be its ideas, ideals,
rationale and ethic. This is an actual force. The culture is an
accumulated soul which flows over and through a number of
individuals and persists after the death of those individuals via
other individuals or even other groups. (DAB, Vol. II, p. 136) |

GROUP THINK, the common denominator of the group is the
reactive bank. Thetans without banks have different responses.
They only have their banks in common. They agree then only on
bank principles. Person to person the bank is identical. So
constructive ideas are individual and seldom get broad agree-
ment in a human group. (HCO PL 7 Feb 65)

GUARD OF THE LEFT, you've got suppress, you’ve got careful
of, and you've got fail to reveal. These buttons: suppress,
careful of and fail to reveal produce sensation. When the goal
doesn’t fire it’s in the left-hand column. (SH Spec 195, 6209C27)

GUARD OF THE RIGHT, invalidate, suggest and mistake. These
buttons produce pain. The goal fires falsely on the buttons on
the right. (SH Spec 195, 6209C27)

GUIDING SECONDARY STYLE, 1. steer plus itsa. You guide
the guy into talking about something and get a tone arm
blowdown and then you make him talk about it. You get the
tone arm action out of it, and then while he’s talking about it he
mentions several new things that give him tone arm action so
you note those things down and you come back afterwards and
talk about those things. (SH Spec 47, 6411C17) 2. differs from
proper guiding style and is done by: (1) steering the pe toward
revealing something or something revealed; (2) handling it with
itsa. (HCOB 21 Feb 66)

GUIDING STYLE AUDITING (LEVEL TWO STYLE), the essen-
tials of Guiding Style Auditing consist of two-way comm that

188
GUK BOMB

steers the pc into revealing a difficulty followed by a repetitive
process to handle what has been revealed. (HCOB 6 Nov 64)

GUILT COMPLEX, before you felt sympathy, you offended in
some way. You did something. Then you were sorry for it. The
offense may have taken place years or only minutes before your
sympathy came about. This is the emotional curve of sympathy.
It goes from antagonism or anger down to sympathy. This used
to be called a “guilt complex,” (HFP, pp. 125-126)

GUK BOMB, I have found that 600 milligrams of Vitamin E
(minimum) assists Sen processing very markedly. It works by
itself but is best taken with an old time “Guk Bomb.” The
formula of the bomb is variable but is basically 100 mg. of
Vitamin B1, 15 gr. of calcium and 500 mg. of Vitamin C. (HCOB
27 Dec 65)

189
H

HAA, 1. Hubbard Advanced Auditor: a Class IV auditor. This
level teaches about service facsimiles and ability. Processes
taught include certainty processing and overt justification pro-
cesses. (CG&AC 75) 2. an alternate name for HAA in 1956 was
B Sen or Bachelor of Sen abroad. (HCOTB 12 Sept 56) [The term
HAA is today used as in def. 1 above.]

HABIT, 1. that stimulus-response reaction dictated by the reac-
tive mind from the content of engrams and put into effect by the
somatic mind. It can be changed only by those things which
change engrams. (DMSMH, p. 39) 2. simply something one
cannot stop. Here we have an example of no control whatever.
(POW, p. 46)

HABIT RELEASE, Grade IV Release. (HCOB 22 Sept 65) [The
current name for Grade IV Release is Ability Release.] See
GRADE IV.

HALF-ACKNOWLEDGEMENT, 1. a continue, an encourage-
ment. (SH Spec 53, 6503C02) 2. sometimes a pe gets scared or
lonesome and you have to give him an uh-huh to encourage him.
(SH Spec 70, 6607C21)

191
HALLUCINATIONS

HALLUCINATIONS, 1. imagined realities with which nobody
else agrees. (HFP, p. 41) 2. we call a mental image picture an
“hallucination” or more properly an automaticity (something
uncontrolled) when it is created by another and seen by self.
(FOT, p. 57) 3. things seen that aren’t there. (7208C30SOQ) 4. a
person imagining and not knowing he was imagining would be a
person who was hallucinating. (5203CM04B) —

HALLUCINATORY CAUSE, the thetan considers that he is
actually being more cause (going down the sub-zero scale). This
is the exact reverse of the reality of the situation. He is
becoming more and more effect. (BTB 6 Feb 60)

HANDLE, finish off, complete, end cycle on. Service and handling
are the same thing. When you give service, you handle. Part of
handling cases is handle N-O-W! One way or another, one gets
the pe handled. (HCOB 15 Jan 70 II)

HANDLING AN ORIGINATION, handling an origination merely
tells the person, “All right, I heard it, you're there.” You might
say it is a form of acknowledgement but it’s not. It is the
communication formula in reverse; but the auditor is still in
control if he handles the origin. (PAB 151) See TR-4.

HANG-FIRE, delayed firing. After the trigger is pulled a gun
sometimes doesn’t go off. This is called a “hang-fire” or delayed
fire if it then goes off late. (LRH Def. Notes)

HANG-UP, stuck (on time track). (HFP, p. 101)

HAPPINESS, is not itself an emotion. It is a word which states a
condition, and the anatomy of that condition is interest. Happi-
ness, you could say, is the overcoming of not unknowable
obstacles toward a known goal. (8ACC-4, 5410CM06)

HARD WAY TRs, demand for a start, two hours of no twitch, no
blink, no eye redness, no unconscious, no wiggle TR Zero.
Really real TRs beginning with Zero. Like the bulletin. (LRH
ED 148 INT)

HAS, abbreviation for 1. Hubbard Apprentice Scientologist.
(HCOB 23 Aug 65) 2. Hubbard Association of Scientologists.
(PAB 75) 3. HCO Area Secretary. (HCOB 20 Nov 71)

HAS CO-AUDIT, using precise processes developed for this
section only, the HAS Co-audit (do-it-yourself processing) seeks

192
HAVING

to improve cases and further interest people in Sen so that they
will take individual HGC processing and individual training.
(HCO PL 14 Feb 61) [Students in Sen academies do still co-audit,
however there is not currently a course specifically called the
HAS Co-audit. Students are allowed to co-audit any level on
which they have trained. There is also a basic course, the HQS,
on which students co-audit.]}

HAS COURSE, a course in elementary communication and con-
trol. Consists of training drills on communication and to put the
student at cause over the environment. There are no pre-
requisites. The graduate is awarded the certificate of Hubbard
Apprentice Scientologist. (CG&AC 75)

HASI, Hubbard Association of Scientologists, International. (PAB
74)

HAS SPECIALIST RUNDOWN, the HAS and establishment
officers are peculiarly subject to efforts to unstabilize them. The
HAS Specialist Rundown consists of processes which increase
the ability to hold a position. (HCOB 20 Nov 71)

HASUK, Hubbard Association of Scientologists of the United
Kingdom. (PAB 75)

HAT, 1. slang for the title and work of a post in a Scientology
Church. Taken from the fact that in many professions such as
railroading the type of hat worn is the badge of the job. (HCO
PL 1 Jul 65 III) 2. term used to describe the write ups,
checksheets and packs that outline the purposes, know-how and
duties of a post. It exists in folders and packs and is trained in
on the person on the post. (HCO PL 22 Sept 70)

HATE, 1. a total ridge. (5904C08) 2. around 1.5 on the tone scale
affinity has almost reversed itself. Its dissonance has become
hate, which can be violent and is so expressed. Here, actually,
we have a factor of entheta repelling theta. (SOS, p. 56)

HATS, Hubbard Advanced Technical Specialist. A Class IX
auditor. This level teaches advanced procedures and develop-
ments since Class VIII. It is available at Saint Hill organizations.
(CG&AC 75)

HAV, havingness. (BTB 20 Aug 71 II)
HAVING, to be able to touch or permeate or to direct the
disposition of. (PAB 83)

193
HAVINGNESS

HAVINGNESS, 1. that which permits the experience of mass and
pressure. (AGL, p. 8) 2. the feeling that one owns or possesses.
(SH Spee 84, 6612C13) 3. can be simply defined as ARC with the
environment. (SH Spec 294, 6308C14) 4. that activity which is
run when needed and when it will not violently deflect the pc’s
attention. (SH Spec 85, 6111C28) 5. the result of creation. (SH
Spec 19, 6106C23) 6. the ability to duplicate that which one
perceives, or create a duplication of what one perceives, or to be
willing to create a duplication of it. But it’s duplication.
(1SHACC-10, 6009C14) 7. ability to communicate with an is-
ness. The ability to conceive an is-ness and communicate with it.
(17ACC-4, 5702C28) 8. havingness is the concept of being able to
reach or not being prevented from reaching. (SH Spec 126,
6203C29) 9. the need to have terminals and things to play for
and on. (Dn 55!, p. 187) Abbr. Hav.

HBA, Hubbard Book Auditor. (HCOB 23 Aug 65) See BOOK
AUDITOR.

HC, Hubbard Consultant. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 II)

HCA, 1. Hubbard Certified Auditor. A Class II auditor. This level
teaches about overt acts and withholds. Among the processes
taught are responsibility processes and integrity processes.
(CG&AC 75) 2. an early course taught in Scientology Churches
only. The certificate of HCA (or HPA, the British equivalent)
was awarded by examination only. (HCOTB 12 Sept 56) [The
current usage of HCA is as in def. 1 above.]

HCA/HPA, [At one time HCA and HPA were equivalent certifi-
cates, HCA being the American designation and HPA, the
British. Data on this appears in HCOTB 12 Sept 56 and HCO PL
1 Oct 58. The current usages of each of these designations are
listed separately under each. ]

HCA LECT, Hubbard Certified Auditors Course Lectures. (HCOB
29 Sept 66)

HCAP, Hubbard Certified Auditor Course, Phoenix. (HCOB 29
Sept 66)

HCI, Hubbard College of Improvement. (FSO 65) [The name of
the Academy on Flag.]

HCL, Hubbard College Lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

194
HEAT

HC LIST, 1. the arbitrary name of the Data Series Correction
List. (FO 3179) 2. it’s called an HC List because there was one
time going to be something called a Hubbard Consultant and
we've still got the list. It’s an out-point/plus-point list and it’s
simply assessed and handled. (ESTO 4, 7203C02 SO II)

HCO, Hubbard Communications Office. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

HCOB, Hubbard Communications Office Bulletin. (HCOB 4 Sept
71 II)

HCO PL, Hubbard Communications Office Policy Letter. (HCO PL
24 Sept 70R)

HCS, Hubbard Clearing Scientologist—formerly Level IV certifi-
cate. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

HDA, Hubbard Dianetic Auditor. (HCOB 23 Aug 65) [An HDA is
a graduate of the Dianetic Auditor’s Course, forerunner to the
HSDC. A graduate of the HSDC is known as an HDC, which is
the current certificate awarded to a Dn auditor.]

HDC, Hubbard Dianetic Counselor. A graduate of the HSDC. (CG&
AC 75) See HUBBARD STANDARD DIANETICS COURSE.

HDG, Hubbard Dianetic Graduate. One who is trained to teach
the Dianetic Course after graduating from the HSDC. (BTB 12
Apr 72R)

HDRF, Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation, Elizabeth, New
Jersey, U.S.A. The first organization, founded by others in
1950, May. Closed 1951 as I had no control of it and the directors
mismanaged it. (LRH Def. Notes)

HEALTH FORM, 1. a form done by an auditor. It is metered. The
end product of this form is entirely to pick out what to audit.
(HCOB 19 May 69) 2. as one needs a guide to know what to audit
on a case, the Dn health form is an essential auditing action. You
take up and audit each symptom or complaint one after the
other. You audit the most available symptom first. Sooner or
later the pe will have a well, healthy body, health, stability, and
a sense of well-being. (HCOB 19 May 69, Health Form, Use Of)

H, E & R, human emotion and reaction. (HCOB 3 Dec 73)
HEAT, the physical sensation associated with the release of
energy in the form of heat which is attendent to actual GPMs,

195
HEAVILY CHARGED CASE

their RIs and associated locks. (HCOB 18 Apr 64, Sen VI Part
One Glossary of Terms)

HEAVILY CHARGED CASE, by which is meant a case with a
very heavy burden of secondaries. (SOS, p. 82)

HEAVY FACSIMILE, a heavy facsimile is an experience, com-
plete with all perceptions, emotions, thoughts and efforts,
occupying a precise place in space and a moment in time. It can
be an operation, an injury, a term of heavy physical exertion, or
even a death. It is composed of the preclear’s own effort and the
effort of the environment (counter-effort). (AP&A, p. 28)

HELATROBUS, an interplanetary nation. A little pip squeak
government, didn’t amount to very much. (SH Spec 268,
6305C23)

HELATROBUS IMPLANTS, 1. call them the heaven implants,
they are the implants implanted by Helatrobus. (SH Spec 268,
6305C23) 2. are actually a long chain of engrams, each of which
has basics. (SH Spec 272, 6306C11) 3. implants which begin with
the electronic clouds over planets, and the dichotomy, plus and
minus, and so forth and sweep on through in a certain series.
(SH Spee 266, 6305C21)

HELD-DOWN FIVES, jammed thinking because of a misunder-
stood or misapplied datums. (HCOB 12 Nov 64) See also HELD-
DOWN SEVEN.

HELD-DOWN SEVEN, Slang. 1. an enforced wrong datum.
(EOS, p. 52) 2. jammed thinking because of a misunderstood or
misapplied datum. (HCOB 12 Nov 64) [This term stems from an
analogy made by LRH comparing the reactive mind to a
computer or adding machine in which the number seven (or five)
had been shorted out so that it was always added in in every
computation. Of course it could not compute correctly or get
correct answers from data as long as this condition existed.]
(EOS, p. 51)

HELLO AND OKAY, a very basic process which resolves chronic
somatics, eye difficulties, any specific item is to have the
affected part or bad area of energy say “Hello” and “Okay” and
“All right” until it is in good condition. (Dn 55/, p. 148) [“Hello”
and “Okay” process commands can be found in HCOB 22 Mar 58,
Clearing Reality. |

196
HGDS

HELP, help is the key button which admits auditing. Help is the
make-break point between sanity and insanity. That a person
cannot accept help along some minor line does not mean that he
is insane, but it certainly means he has some neurotic traits.
(HCOB 5 May 60)

HELP FACTOR, the willingness to assist. This also has to do with
cause—what can the individual cause? An organization which
cannot help anybody will have a tendency to fail. (ESTO No. 8
7203C06SO)

HELP PROCESSING, there are probably thousands of ways help
could be run. But the one general process on help that would

rank high would be “What have you helped?” “What have you
not helped?” alternated. This is the best way I know of to run
the sense of what help one has given plus what help one has
withheld. This lets the pe as-is his failures to help as well as his
denials of help. (HCOB 12 May 60)

HEV, Human Evaluation Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

HGA, 1. Hubbard Graduate Auditor. Class VII auditor. Only
available to Sea Org or five year contracted Church staff. This
level teaches the power processes and review auditing. It is not
a prerequisite to Class VIII, however. It is delivered in Church
of Scientology Saint Hill organizations. (CG&AC 75) 2. in 1956, an
HGA was also to be known as D. Sen or Doctor of Scientology
abroad. (HCOTB 12 Sept 56) See DOCTOR OF SCIENTOLOGY.
3. an honor award and may be made by nomination or selection;
either way it is for those who are consistently producing
excellent results in their own fields and to form a grade by
which these recruits can be recognized. (PAB 6) [Current usage
of the term HGA is as in def. 1 above.]

HGC, Hubbard Guidance Center. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

HGC ADMIN, Hubbard Guidance Center Administrator. (HCOB
23 Aug 65)

HGDS, Hubbard Graduate Dianetic Specialist. An Expanded
Dianetics auditor. (CG&AC 75) See also EXPANDED DIA-
NETICS.

197
HIDDEN DATA LINE

HIDDEN DATA LINE, some students have believed there was a
“hidden data line” of tech in Sen, a line on which Sen tech was
given out by me but not made known to students. This started
me looking, for there is no such line. The whole of technology is
released in HCO Bulletins and HCO Policy Letters and tapes I
do and release. I don’t tell people anything in some private way,
not even instructors. The apparency is somebody’s pretense to
know from me more than is on the tapes and in books and
mimeos, or, brutally, somebody’s alter-is of materials. This
looks like a “hidden data line.” It surely isn’t. (HCO PL 16
Apr 65)

HIDDEN STANDARD, 1. a hidden standard is a problem a
person thinks must be resolved before auditing can be seen to
have worked. It’s a standard by which to judge Scn or auditing
or the auditor. This hidden standard is always an old problem of
long duration. It is a postulate-counter-postulate situation. The
source of the counter-postulate was suppressive to the pc.
(HCOB 8 Nov 65) 2. is not just a physical or mental difficulty but
one by which the pe measures his case gains. A case measure-
ment thing used secretly by the pe. (BTB 18 Sept 72) Abbr. HS.

HIGH CRIME CHECKOUTS, 1. starrated checkouts on all pro-
cesses and their immediate technology and on relevant policy _
letters on HGC interns or staff auditors in the Tech Division or
staff auditors or interns in the Qual Division for the levels and
actions they will use before permitting them to audit church pes
and on supervisors in Tech and Qual who instruct or examine.
(HCO PL 8 Mar 66) 2. high crime checkouts are done by auditors
to their highest class. Any new procedure must be drilled on a
doll in addition to the high crime checkout before the OK to
audit chit is issued. (BTB 5 Sept 72RA) [High crime checkouts
are so named because it is an ethics offense in the nature of a
high crime for failing to insist upon this policy or preventing this
policy from going into effect or minimizing the checkouts or
lists. ]

HIGH CRIMES, suppressive acts. (ISE, p. 48)

HIGH SCHOOL INDOCTRINATION, an extremely precise activ-
ity which consists of teaching an auditor not to let a preclear
stop him. (HCOB 4 Oct 56)

HI HI INDOC, tone 40 8-C. (PAB 118)

198
HOLLOW SPOT

HIGH TA, 1.3.5 or up at session start. (HCOB 3 Jan 70) 2. a high
TA in Sen is always an overrun. In Dn it means an engram too
late on the chain to erase is in restimulation. (HCOB 28 Apr 69)
3. high TA means the person can still stop things and is trying
to do so. However, all one has to do is restimulate and leave
unflat an engram chain to have a high TA. High TA is reflecting
the force contained in the chain. (HCOB 16 Jun 70)

HIGH-TONE INDIVIDUAL, thinks wholly into the future. He is
extroverted toward his environment. He clearly observes the
environment with full perception unclouded by undistinguished
fears about the environment. He thinks very little about himself
but operates automatically in his own interests. He enjoys
existence. His calculations (postulations and evaluations) are
swift and accurate. He is very self-confident. He knows he
knows and does not even bother to assert that he knows. He
controls his environment. (AP&A, p. 37)

HI-LO TA, high low TA. (HCOB 1 Jan 72RA)

HI-LO TA ASSESSMENT FOR CONFESSIONALS. See HI-LO
TA ASSESSMENT FOR INTEGRITY PROCESSING.

HI-LO TA ASSESSMENT FOR INTEGRITY PROCESSING, this
list is used to get a TA in normal range before proceeding into
an Integrity Processing session. It is used after any possible
false TA has been checked for and handled, if TA is still below
2.0 or at 3.5 or above. (BTB 6 Dec 72R)

HIPS, Hubbard Integrity Processing Specialist. (HCO PL 24
Dec 72)

HIT, punished, hurt, etc. (HCOB 1 Nov 68)
HO-HUM, minus randomity. (Adil 36)

HOLDER, 1. any engram command which makes an individual
remain in an engram knowingly or unknowingly. (DMSMH
Gloss) 2. a species of command. These include such things as
“stay here,” “sit right there and think about it,” “come back and
sit down,” “I can’t go,” “I mustn’t leave,” etc. (DMSMH, p. 213)

HOLLOW SPOT, a segment of the body which has such a hard
impact in the center that all attention units in a mock-up will
flow out from the center. It’s an outflow from a central point but
the point is a counter-effort. (5206CM24B)

199
HOME UNIVERSE

HOME UNIVERSE, the universe a thetan made for himself. (SH
Spec 88, 6612C06)

HOMO NOVIS, 1. Homo man, novis new. (BCR, p. 12) 2. a
theta-animated mest body possesed of new and desirable attri-
butes; a mest clear, a good, sane rational mest being about a
skycraper higher than Homo sapiens. (HOM, p. 40) 3. the
Second Stage Release is definitely Homo novis. The person
ceases to respond like Homo sapiens and has fantastic capability
to learn and act. (HCOB 28 Jun 65)

HOMO SAPIENS, 1. a mest body, whether it belongs to the race
of man or the race of ants is yet but an animated vegetable.
Given a theta being to guide it, it becomes part of a composite
such as Homo sapiens. By itself, the body would live, walk
around, react, sleep, kill, and direct an existence no better than
that of a field mouse, or a zombie. Put a theta being over it and
it becomes possessed of ethics and morals and direction and
goals and the ability to reason; it becomes this strange thing
called Homo sapiens. (HOM, p. 42)

HONEST COMPLETION, means a student who has studied all
the materials of the course using full study tech. Has done the
demonstrations and drills, and can effectively apply the mater-
ials of the course. (HCO PL 16 May 73R)

HOPE, the desire that sometime in the future one will cease to
have something which he no longer wants but can’t seem to get
rid of or that one will acquire something he wants. (2ACC-31A,
5312CM22)

HOPE FACTOR, 1. validating those good indicators that are
present in the pc. When an auditor doesn’t he’s not really
putting in a hope factor. Validating the good indicator is a
lessening of the somatic or condition. (SH Spee 3, 6401009)
2. something can be done about it. (SH Spec 297, 6308C21)

HOT QUESTION, question with reaction on it. (SH Spec 63,
6110C05)

HOT SPUR LINE, where there is a senior review C/S there is a
hot spur line from the C/S to the senior C/S and back to the
C/S. This is not necessarily an instant line. It can be a 12-hour
lag line. New tech in use, fantastic completions and “dog cases”

200
HSTS

nobody can make anything out of go on this senior C/S hot spur
line. (HCOB 5 Mar 71)

HPA, Hubbard Professional Auditor. A Class III auditor. This
level deals with ARC and ARC breaks. Listing and nulling and
two-way comm are taught at this level, as well as change
processes and ARC Break SW. (CG&AC 75)

HPC LECT, Hubbard Professional Course Lecture. (HCOB 29
Sept 66)

HPCS, Hubbard Professional Course Supervisor. (HCO PL 27
Oct 70)

HPCSC, Hubbard Professional Course Supervisor’s Course. (HCO
PL 27 Oct 70 II)

HQS, Hubbard Qualified Scientologist. A basic Scn course which
teaches about co-auditing and how to handle other people, with
group auditing. It consists of, in part, TRs 0 to 4 and 6 to 9, plus
students actually co-audit on CCHs, Op Pro by Dup and Self
Analysis lists. There is no prerequisite for this course. (CG&AC
75)

HRS, Hubbard Recognized Scientologist. A Class 0 auditor. This
level teaches about communication. Processes taught are Level
0 processes and ARC SW processes. (CG&AC 75)

HS, hidden standard. (HCOB 10 Jun 72 V)

HSCSC, Hubbard Senior Course Supervisor Course. The HSCSC
covers the total expertise of the technology of supervising.
(FBDL 328)

HSDC, Hubbard Standard Dianetics Course. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

HSS, Hubbard Senior Scientologist. A Class VI auditor. An HSS
is a graduate of the Saint Hill Special Briefing Course. This
course consists of the full practical application of Sen grades,
repair, setups, assists and special cases tech up to Class VI.
(CG&AC 75)

HSST, Hubbard Specialist of Standard Tech, Class VIII Case
Supervisor. (CG&AC 75)

HSTS, Hubbard Standard Technical Specialist. A Class VIII
auditor. The Class VIII Course teaches exact handling of all

201
HTS

cases up to 100 per cent result, as well as Class VIII procedures,
all case setup actions, all processes and corrective actions, as
well as flubless Class VIII auditing. (CG&AC 75)

HTS, Hubbard Trained Scientologist. A Class I auditor. This level
teaches about problems. The processes taught include objective
processes and Level I processes, such as help and control
processes. (CG&AC 75)

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE, purpose: to be the
office of LRH. To handle and expedite the communication lines
of LRH. To prepare or handle the preparation of manuscripts
and other to-be-published material of Sen. To keep, use and care
for LRH’s office equipment. To assist the Churches of Scien-
tology and their people. To set a good example of efficiency to
the Churches. (HCO PL 12 Oct 62)

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE BULLETIN, HCOBs
written by LRH only. These are the technical issue line. They
are valid from first issue unless specifically cancelled. All data
for auditing and courses is contained in HCOBs. They are
distributed as indicated, usually to technical staff. They are red
ink on white paper, consecutive by date. (HCO PL 24 Sept 70R)

HUBBARD COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE POLICY LETTER,
HCO PLs written by LRH only. This is a permanently valid
issue of all Third Dynamic, organization and administrative
technology. These, regardless of date or age, form the know-
how in running a Scientology Church, organization, group or
company. The bulk of hat material is made up from HCO PLs.
They are printed in green ink on white paper and are distributed
to all staff or as indicated or as made up in packs. (HCO PL 24
Sept 70R)

HUBBARD CONSULTANT, A Hubbard Consultant is skilled in
testing, two-way comm, consultation, programming and inter-
personal relations. This is the certificate especially awarded to
persons trained to handle personnel, students and staff. These
technologies and special training were developed to apply Sen
auditing skills to the field of administration especially. An HC is
requisite for course supervisors and student consultants. (HCOB
19 Jun 71 III) Abbr. HC.

HUBBARD ELECTROMETER, is called an E-meter for short.
Technically it is a specially developed Wheatstone bridge well

202
HVA

known to electrically minded people as a device to measure the
amount of resistance to a flow of electricity. (BIEM, p. 1) See
E-METER.

HUBBARD GUIDANCE CENTER, that department of the tech-
nical division of a Scientology Church which delivers auditing.
Department 12, Division 4. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) Abbr. HGC.

HUBBARD STANDARD DIANETICS COURSE, teaches about
the human mind, mental image pictures, the time track, locks,
secondaries and engrams. The processes taught are Standard
Dn auditing and Dn assists. (CG&AC 75) Abbr. HSDC.

HUMAN ENGINEERING, it’s adapting the machinery to fit the
person. It’s adapting machinery and spatial arrangements and
desks and chairs and things like that. The adjustment of the
machinery and spatial arrangements to the people who are
operating it is important. (ESTO No. 12, 7203C06 SO II)

HUMAN EVALUATION, a diagnosis of behavior. (5108CM13A)

HUMANITARIAN OBJECTIVE, the humanitarian objective is to
make a safe environment in which the fourth dynamic engram
can be audited out. By engram we mean the mental block that
prevents peace and tolerance; by fourth dynamic we mean that
impulse to survive as mankind instead of just individuals.
Obviously we must do this. (Ron’s Jour 68)

HUMAN MIND, see MIND.

HUMOR, humor is rejection. The ability to reject. The ability to
throw something away. That is humor. (8ACC-27, 5411CM05)

HURDY-GURDY SYSTEM, a “hurdy-gurdy” was a musical
instrument played by turning a crank so that a wheel striking
strings in turn caused music. The “hurdy-gurdy” system was so
called because the auditor went round and round the points of
the ARC triangle (A-R-C) plus enforced and dominate, inhibit
and nullify on persons the pe had known, session after session to
restore his memory. Mentioned on page 65, Book 2, Science of
Survival and described in full later in that same chapter on
pages 77-83. (LRH Def. Notes)

HVA, 1. Hubbard Validated Auditor. A Class V auditor. This level
is taught at Church of Scientology Saint Hill organizations and
contains materials about the chronological development of Sen
with full theory and application. (CG&AC 75) 2. Class V reviews

203
HYPER-SONIC

all the classes and retrains where necessary and awards
permanent classification for all the lower certificates as well as
Class V. (Aud 8 UK)

HYPER-SONIC, if a person hears voices which have not existed
and yet supposes that these voices really spoke, we have
“over-imagination.” In Dn imaginary sound recall would be
hyper-sonic, (hyper—over). (DMSMH, p. 188)

HYPER-VISIO, if a person sees scenes which have not existed
and yet supposes these scenes were real, we have “over
imagination.” In Dn imaginary sight recall would be hyper-visio,
(hyper=over). (DMSMH, p. 188)

HYPNOTISM, 1. an address to the reactive mind. It reduces
self-determinism by interposing the commands of another below
the analytical level of an individual’s mind; it enturbulates a
case markedly, and materially aberrates human beings by
keying in engrams which would otherwise lie dormant. (SOS,
Bk. 2, p. 220) 2. a continuing inflow without an opportunity on
the part of the subject to outflow. (Dn 55!, p. 63) 3. the process
of restimulating states of apathy by the introduction of addi-
tional engramic content which would thereafter be as compul-
sive as the other data in the incident. (5109CM17B) 4. amnesia
trance for the purpose of planting suggestions. (Exp Jour
Winter-Spring 1950)

HYPO-HEARING, a condition in which a person has something he
is afraid to hear. He plays the radio very loudly, makes people
repeat continually and misses pieces of the conversation. Men
and women are “hysterically” deaf without any conscious knowl-
edge of it. Their “hearing just isn’t so good.” In Dn, this is being
called hypo-hearing, (hypo—under). (DMSMH, p. 189)

HYPO-SIGHT, the person who is always losing something when it
lies in fair view before him, who misses signposts, theater bills
and people who are in plain sight is “hysterically” blind to some
degree. He is afraid he will see something. In Dn this is being
called, since the word “hysterical” is a very inadequate and
overly dramatic one, hypo-sight, (hypo—under). (DMSMH, p.
189)

HYSTERIA, the phenomenon of being out of control. (AAR, p. 91)

204
I

“J”, 1. the will, the determining force of the organism, the
awareness. (DMSMH, p. 87) 2. the awareness of awareness unit.
(NOTL, p. 69) 3. the thetan, the center of awareness, that part
of the total organism that is fundamentally cause. (COHA Gloss)

IATROGENIC, means illness generated by doctors. An operation
during which the doctor’s knife slipped, and accidentally harmed
the patient might cause an iatrogenic illness or injury since the
fault would have been with the surgeons. (DMSMH, p. 172)

ICDS, International Congress of Dianeticists and Scientologists.
(HCOB 29 Sept 66)

IDEAL STATE, what do we miean by an ideal state. A state
somebody wanted to be in over which he had full power of
choice. That would be an ideal state. (SH Spec 273, 6306C12)

IDENTIFICATION, 1. the inability to evaluate differences in
time, location, form, composition, or importance. ( SOS, p. 153)
2. identification is a monotone assignment of importance. (SOS,
p. 153) 3. the lowest level of reasoning is complete inability to
differentiate, which is to say, identification. (SOS, p.153) 4. Du-
plicating in one space continually, is in itself identification.
(2ACC-25B, 5812CM17)

205
ILL

ILL, being medically diagnosed as suffering from a known, well
defined physical illness susceptible to medical care and relief.
(HCO PL 6 Oct 58)

ILLUSION, 1. a surface manifestation which disappears when
experience is consulted. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21) 2. a product of
the actual. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21) 3. any idea, space, energy,
object or time concept which one creates himself. (Scn 8-8008
Gloss)

IMAGINARY CAUSE, imagining they do or cause things bad or
good. (HCOB 1 Nov 68 II)

IMAGINARY VISIO, the scenery imagination constructs. (SOS,
p. 72) See DUB-IN.

IMAGINATION, 1. the recombination of things one has sensed,
thought or intellectually computed into existence, which do not
necessarily have existence. This is the mind’s method of
envisioning desirable goals or forecasting futures. (DMSMH,
p. 14) 2. the ability to create or forecast a future or to create,
change or destroy a present or past. (Scn 8-8008, p. 7) 3. if you
take the word imagination apart, you will discover that it means
merely the postulating of images or the assembly of perceptions
into creations as you desire them. (SA, p. 158)

IMMORTALITY, infinite survival, the absolute goal of survival.
The individual seeks this on the first dynamic as an organism
and as a theta entity and in the perpetuation of his name by his
group. On the second dynamic he seeks it through children and
so on through the eight dynamics. Life survives through the
persistence of theta. A species survives through the persistence
of the life in it. A culture survives through the persistence of the
species using it. There is evidence that the theta of an individual
may survive as a personal entity from life to life through many
lives on earth. (SOS Gloss)

IMPACT, cause and effect simultaneously. (PAB 30)

IMPLANT, 1. a painful and forceful means of overwhelming a
being with artificial purpose or false concepts in a malicious
attempt to control and suppress him. (Aud 71 ASHO) 2. an

206
INCIDENT

electronic means of overwhelming the thetan with a significance.
(HCOB 8 May 63) 3.-an unwilling and unknowing receipt of a
thought. An intentional installation of fixed ideas, contra-
survival to the thetan. (SH Spec 83, 6612C06)

IMPLANT GOAL, an implanted goal—a goal the thetan himself
has not decided upon—but which has been induced in him by
overwhelming force or persuasion. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen VI
Part One Glossary of Terms)

IMPLANT GPM, an implanted goal problem mass. An electronic
means of overwhelming the thetan with a signficance using the
mechanics of the actual pattern of living to entrap the thetan
and force obedience to behavior patterns. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen
VI Part One Glossary of Terms)

IMPLOSION, something that could be likened to the collapse of a
field of energy such as a sphere toward a common center point,
making an inflow. It can happen with the same violence as an
explosion; but does not necessarily do so. (Sen 8-8008, p. 49)

IMPORTANCE, is mass. In thinkingness when you say impor-
tance you mean mass. (SH Spec 39, 6108C15)

IN, things which should be there and are or should be done and
are, are said to be “in”; i.e. “We got scheduling in.” (HCOB 19
Jun 71 III)

INACCESSIBLE CASE, that person who is bound and deter-
mined to stay sick, who won’t talk to you, will have nothing to
do with being healed in any way, is an inaccessible case.
(5011022)

INADVERTENT WITHHOLD, 1. the pc thinks he is withholding
because the auditor didn’t hear or acknowledge. (HCOB 13 Sept
65) 2. he didn’t intend to withhold it, just nobody would
acknowledge it. He never intended to withhold it at all. An
inadvertent withhold will cause very near the same phenomenon
as an actual withhold. (SH Spec 60, 6506C11)

INCIDENT, an experience, simple or complex, related by the
same subject, location, perception or people that takes place in a

207
INCREDIBLE CHAIN

short and finite time period such as minutes, hours or days; also,
mental image pictures of such experiences. (HCOB 12 Dec 71
IX) .

INCREDIBLE CHAIN, it’s the things that have happened on his
track which are, to him, incredible. And because they are so
incredible he doesn’t believe them, and neither does anybody
else. But it’s most because nobody else believed them. And he
doesn’t believe them himself so the chain itself remains hidden
because it’s incredible; the incredible chain. (ESTO 5, 7203C03
SO I)

IND, “Jnd” for indicated to pe. (HCOB 26 Jun 71)

INDICATOR, a condition or circumstance arising in a session which
indicates whether the session is running well or badly. (HCOB 28
Dec 63) 2. the little flag sticking out that shows there is a possible
situation underneath that needs attention. (HCO PL 15 May 70
II)

INDICATORS, those manifestations in a person or group that
indicate whether it is doing well or poorly, signal an approaching
change, or show that the auditing process has reached the
desired end point. (HCOB 20 Feb 70)

IN-DISPERSAL, where the flows are all travelling toward a
common center. One might call this an implosion. (Sen 8-8008,
pp. 17-18)

INDIVIDUAL, 1. an individual is a collection of “memories” going
back to his first appearance on earth. In other words, he is the
composite of all his facsimiles plus his impulse to be. Individual-
ity dependes upon facsimiles. (HFP, p. 111) 2. somebody who is
operating in coordination with himself twenty-four hours a day.
That’s an individual. An organism which is unhappy, aberrated,
is an organism which is working at cross purposes with itself
twenty-four hours a day. (5110CM11B) 3. when we say the
individual we are talking about something as precise as an
apple. We are not talking about a collection of behavior patterns
which we al] learned about in the study of rats. We are talking
about something that is finite. We are talking about somebody.
The somethingness that you are and the capabilities you can be
and this is what we are talking about. We are not talking about
the color of your hair or the length of your feet. We are talking
about you. (Abil Mz 5)

208
INSANE PC

INDIVIDUATION, a separation from knowingness. (5203CM10B)
INDOC, indoctrination. (HCOB 10 Apr 57)

INERT INCIDENT, 1. an incident which is an inert incident is not
having any effect on the pe. It’s not part of his aberrative
picture. (SH Spec 300, 6808C28) 2. an incident, unrestimulated.
(SH Spec 300, 6308C28)

IN ETHICS, see ETHHKS, Def. 5.

INFINITY SYMBOL, oo. As seen in some Scientology books,
stood upright —8. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

Infinity Symbol

INFINITY-VALUED LOGIC, in Dn, there is a new way of
thinking about things which underlies a great deal of its
technology. Instead of two-valued logic or three-valued logic we
have infinity-valued logic. Here is a gradient scale which
permits no absolute at either end. In other words, there is not
an absolute right and an absolute wrong, just as there is no
absolute stillness and no absolute motion. Of course, it is one of
the tenets of Dn that absolutes are not attainable but only
approachable. (SOS, Bk. 2, pp. 249-250) See also LOGIC.

INSANE, 1. the truly insane cannot control or withhold their evil
impulses and dramatize them at least covertly. The insane are
not always visible. But they are visible enough. And they are
malicious. (HCOB 10 May 72) 2. having been pronounced insane
by a psychiatrist or being incapable of any responsibility for
social conduct. (HCO PL 6 Oct 58)

INSANE CERTAINTY, would be no certainty at all, or a
certainty asserted by only one or two people and disagreed with
by all others. (Cert, Vol. 10, No. 12)

INSANE PC, by insane pe is meant one who is subject to highly
irrational and destructive behavior. (HCO PL 12 Jun 69)

209
INSANITY

INSANITY, 1. the overt or covert but always complex and
continuous determination to harm or destroy. (HCOB 28 Nov 70)
2. insanity is most often the suppressed agony of actual physical
illness and injury. (HCOB 2 Apr 69) 3. the obsessive adaptation
of a solution to the exclusion of all other solutions in the absence
of a problem. (SH Spec 27X, 6107C04) 4. the inability to
associate or differentiate properly. (Scn 8-8008, p. 44) 5. insanity
is an emotion which is brought about by the compulsion to reach
and the inhibition not to reach or the compulsion not to reach
and the inhibition to reach. (2ACC-18A, 5312CM08) 6. the best
definition of which I know would be: the person widely believes
that the symbols are the things. (PDC 20) 7. insanity is an
individual assisting things which inhibit survival and destroying
things which assist survival. (5109CM24A) 8. if an individual is
incapable of adjusting himself to his environment so as to get
along with or obey or command his fellows, or, more impor-
tantly, if he is incapable of adjusting his environment, then he
can be considered to be “insane.” But it is a relative term.
(DMSMG, p. 380) 9. the point between where a person who is
sane goes thereafter insane is very precise. It’s the exact point
at. which he begins to stop something. At that moment he is
insane. At first he is insane on that one subject; then he can get
another idée fixe and become insane on another subject, thus
getting cumulative insanity. But there is no doubt of his insanity
on that one subject, something that he is trying to stop.
(6711C18SO) 10. insanity itself is simply must reach—can’t
reach, must withdraw—can’t withdraw. (SH Spec 98, 6201C10)

IN-SCANNING, taking energy manifestations that were in the
incident as they flowed in toward the preclear. That’s in-scan-
ning. That’s environment to the preclear in the incident.
(5203CM04B)

IN SESSION, the definition of in session is interested in own case
and willing to talk to the auditor. When this definition describes
the session in progress, then of course the pc will be able to as-is
and will cognite. (HCOB 26 Apr 73 I)

INSTANT READ, 1. that reaction of the needle which occurs at
the precise end of any major thought voiced by the auditor.
(HCOB 25 May 62) 2. if the needle reacts within 1/5 to 1/10 of a
second after the question is asked, it is an instant read. This is

210
INTELLIGENCE

valid. If it reacts 1/2 to 1 second after the question, this is
invalid. (HCOB 28 Sept 61)

INSTANT ROCK SLAM, that “rock slam” which begins at the
end of the major thought of any item. Symbol IRS. (HCOB 8
Nov 62)

INSTANT RUDIMENT READ, on rudiments, repetitive or fast,
the instant read can occur anywhere within the last word of the
question or when the thought major has been anticipated by the
preclear, and must be taken up by the auditor. This is not a
prior read. Preclears poorly in session, being handled by
auditors with indifferent TR-1, anticipate the instant read
reactively as they are under their own control. Such a read
occurs in the body of the last meaningful word in the question. It
never occurs latent. (EMD, p. 37)

INST CONF, Instructors’ Conference. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

INSTITUTIONALIZED, having been committed to a public or
private institution for the insane. (HCO PL 6 Oct 58)

IN TECH, when tech is in, we mean that Sen is being applied and
is being correctly applied. (HCOB 13 Sept 65)

INTEG, Integrity. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

INTEGRITY, (1.) the condition of having no part or element taken
away or wanting; undivided or unbroken state; wholeness. (2.)
the condition of not being marred or violated; unimpaired or
uncorrupted condition; soundness. (3.) soundness or moral
principle; the character of uncorrupted virtue, especially in
relation to truth and fair dealing; uprightness, honesty, sincer-
ity. (BTB 4 Dec 72)

INTEGRITY PROCESSING, that processing which enables a
person, within the reality of his own moral codes and those of
the group, to reveal his overts so he no longer requires to
withhold and so enhances his own integrity and that of the
group. (BTB 4 Dec 72) Abor. IP.

INTELLIGENCE, 1. is the ability to recognize differences,
similarities and identities. (HCO PL 26 Apr 70R) 2. the ability to
perceive, pose and resolve problems. (Scn 0-8, p. 64) 3. the
ability of an individual, group or race to resolve problems
relating to survival. (Sen 0-8, p. 61)

211
INTELLIGENCE GAIN

INTELLIGENCE GAIN, loss of restimulation by stupidity by
reason of attempts to confront or experience the problems of life
(intelligence appears when stupidity is keyed out or erased).
Intelligence is a confronting ability. (HCOB 28 Feb 59)

INTENSIVE, an intensive is defined as any one single period of
12 1/2 hours or 25 hours of auditing delivered all within one
single week or weekends on a set schedule. (HCO PL 20 Oct 71)

INTENSIVE PROCEDURE, the Standard Operating Procedure,
1954, given in The Creation of Human Ability, by L. Ron
Hubbard. (PXZL, p. 277)

INTENTION, 1. intention is the command factor as much as
anything else. If you intend something to happen it happens if
you intend it to happen. Verbalization is not the intention. The
intention is the carrier wave which takes the verbalization along
with it. (Abid 270) 2. degree of relative beingness which an
individual desires to assume as plotted on the tone scale.
(5203CM04A)

INTENTIONAL WITHHOLD, one which is a withhold because he
would be punished if he admitted it. (SH Spec 63, 6110C05)

INTEREST, 1. interest is more consideration than attention, and
is therefore attention with intention. Interest, therefore, could
be defined as this; attention with an intention to give or attract
attention. (COHA, p. 103) 2. interest does not mean happiness
and joy. Interest is only absorbed attention and a desire to talk
about it. (HCOB 1 Jul 63)

INTERESTED/INTERESTING, 1. a thetan is interested, and an
object is interesting. A thetan is not interesting. He is inter-
ested. And when a person becomes terribly interesting he has
lots of problems. That is the chasm that is crossed by all of your
celebrities, anybody who is foolish enough to become famous. He
crosses over from being interested in life to being interesting,
and people who are interesting are really no longer interested in
life. (PXL, p. 191) 2. “A” has the intention of interesting “b.”
“B” to be talked to, becomes interesting. Similarly “b,” when he
emanates a communication, is interested and “a” is interesting.
Cause is interested, effect is interesting. (Dn 55!, p. 66)

212
INTERN E)SHIP

INTERIORIZATION, 1. interiorization means going into it too
fixedly, and becoming part of it too fixedly. It doesn’t mean just
going into your head. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13) 2. if the havingness
of the preclear is low, he is apt to close in tight to the body
because this gives him more havingness and if the preclear fears
that the body is going to go out of control he will also move in
closer to the body. Thus we get interiorization as no more
complicated than fear of loss of control and drops in havingness.
(SCP, p. 18) Abbr. Int.

INTERIORIZATION RUNDOWN, 1. also known as Int-Ext RD
for Interiorization-Exteriorization Rundown. (HCOB 24 Sept 71)
2. the Interiorization Rundown is a remedy designed to permit
the pc to be further audited after he has gone exterior. The Int
Rundown is not meant to be sold or passed off as a method of
exteriorizing a pc. (HCOB 17 Dec 71R) See EXTERIORIZA-
TION RUNDOWN.

INTERN(E), an advanced graduate or a recent graduate in a
professional field who is getting practical experience under the
supervision of an experienced worker. (HCOB 19 Jul 71)

INTERN(E)SHIP, serving a period as an intern, or an activity
offered by a Church of Scientology by which experience can be
gained. The apprenticeship of an auditor is done as a Scientology
Church intern. A course graduate becomes an auditor by
auditing. That means lots of auditing. (HCOB 19 Jul 71)

213
INTERROGATION

INTERROGATION, (SILENT), how to read an E-meter on a
silent subject. When the person placed on a meter will not talk
but can be made to hold the cans, it is still possible to obtain full
information from the person asking questions, one expects no
reply, asks for no pictures. The auditor just watches the needle
for dips when questions are asked. (HCOB 30 Mar 60)

INT-EXT, interiorization-exteriorization. (HCOB 30 May 70)

INT-EXT RD, Interiorization-Exteriorization Rundown. (HCOB
24 Sept 71)

IN THE WHITE, Slang. on an OCA, the center line of 00 is the
critical point of the graph. A little bit into the lower gray-shaded
area is not too bad. But when they go down into the white, like a
minus 62 or a minus 76 or even a minus 26, they’re said to be “in
the white.” (7203C30SO)

INT RD, Interiorization Rundown also known as Int-Ext RD for
Interiorization-Exteriorization Rundown. (HCOB 24 Sept 71)

INTRODUCTION OF AN ARBITRARY, an arbitrary may be
considered as a factor introduced into a problem’s solution when
that factor does not derive from a known natural law but only
from an opinion or authoritarian command. A problem resolved
by data derived from known natural laws resolves well and
smoothly and has a useful solution. When a problem is resolved
by introducing arbitraries (factors based on opinion or command
but not natural law) then that solution, when used, will
ordinarily require more arbitraries to make the solution applic-
able. The harder one tries to apply the solution corrupted by
arbitraries to any situation, the more arbitraries have to be
introduced. (SOS Gloss)

INTROSPECTION RUNDOWN, the essence of the Introspection
Rundown is looking for and correcting all those things which
caused the person to look inward, worriedly and wrestle with
the mystery of some incorrectly designated error. The end
phenomena is the person extroverted, no longer looking inward
worriedly in a continuous self-audit without end. (HCOB 23 Jan
T4RA)

214
INVADER FORCES

INTROVERSION, 1. looking in too closely. (POW, p. 92) 2. a
manifestation of the analytical mind trying to solve problems on
improper data, and observing the organism being engaged in
activities which are not conducive to survival along the dy-
namics. (DTOT, p. 105)

@
ar \ wei
L
\

INTROVERTED, he would look in on himself. (SH Spec 84,
6612013)

INT RUNDOWN CORRECTION LIST, used when Int-Ext reads
on any repair list and the Int RD has already been done or
corrected, when a bog occurs on the Int RD itself, or if pe upset
after Int RD and/or TA gone high or low immediately after.
Don’t re-run Int RD—use the correction list. EP is al] reading
items handled to F/N, EP of Int RD, and INT-Ext no longer
reading. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)

INVADER FORCES, 1. an electronics people. The electronics
people usually happen to be an evolutionary line which is on
heavy gravity planets and so they develop electronics. The
reason you say invader force at all is because at some time along
the line fairly early in its youth it took off to conquer the whole
mest universe. You could expect almost anything in terms of
physical form particularly physical form which matched the
peculiar purpose of this group. They’ve usually got some

215
IN VALENCE

gimmick like Fac One. Control has been the main thing. The
way to control territory is control people. (5206CM27A) 2. there
are five invader forces active and one aborning, but the one
aborning is not active. It will probably be several million years
before you begin to see this one, some of you hit the track 60
trillion years ago mest universe and some of you didn’t get into
the mest universe until about 3 trillion years ago that is invader
force one and invader force two. This is E-meter data confirmed
from preclear to preclear. Now we don’t see anything of invader
force three here on earth. I just haven’t found any threes.
Invader force four is really holding the fort someplace or other.
Every little while, a few million years, some planet will get
taken over by an invader force. (5206CM27A) See also FIFTH
INVADER FORCE.

IN VALENCE, what we mean by “in valence” is simply in the
valence he was in when the engram occurred. Now when we say
out of valence we mean simply and entirely the pe was not in the
body he was occupying during the incident. (SH Spec 51,
6109C07)

INVALIDATION, 1. refuting or degrading or discrediting or
denying something someone else considers to be fact. (HCOB 2
Jun 71 I) 2. any thought, emotion or effort, or counter-thought,
counter-emotion or counter-effort which denies or smothers the
thought, emotion or effort of the individual. (HOM, p. 56)
3. invalidation by words is the symbolic level of being struck.
(2ACC-19B, 5312CM09) 4. basically, non-attention. Attention
itself is quite important for attention is necessary before an
effect can be created. (PAB 8) 5. invalidation is force applied.
You apply enough force to anybody and you've invalidated him.
How invalidated can he get? Dead! (5207CM24B) Abbr. Inval.

INVALIDATION OF AUDITORS, could be defined as (a) letting
an auditor lose, (b) correcting things he does right. (HCOB 1
Sept 71 I)

INVENTION PROCESSING, this is done by having the preclear
invent various ideas or considerations by which he creates stable
data to displace aberrated stable data, and to handle confusions.
(Op. Bull. No. 1)

216
IS-ES, THE

INVERSION, 1. a switch to an opposite obsessive consideration
such as from compulsion to inhibition. There may be many
inversions on any consideration, each leading further from
self-determinism. (COHA Gloss) 2. his resistance has been
overcome so that when it tries to outflow, it inflows. That’s an
inversion and that’s what’s meant by inversion. A person tries
to outflow, he inflows—in other words, he exactly reverses his
consideration on the thing. (8BACC-8, 5410CM12) 3. the flows
have exactly turned around and that’s what we know as an
inversion and that’s exactly why we call it an inversion; because
it’s a flow going backwards. (SH Spec 6, 6106C02)

INVERTED DYNAMICS, we can take a person and actually have
him be someplace else when he is right there. See, he’ll still
keep this body but he'll actually be and operate someplace else
and you'll run into this every once in a while in a preclear. We
call this inverted dynamics. (2ACC-1B, 5811CM17)

INVISIBLE CASE, cannot see mock-ups. They have no field and
do not see anything when they close their eyes, everything is
invisible, they have no facsimiles, no mock-ups. (PAB 154)

INVISIBLE FIELD, a part of some lock, secondary or engram
that is “invisible.” It like a black field responds to R38R. (HCOB
23 Apr 69)

IP, see INTEGRITY PROCESSING.

IQ, 1. intelligence quotient. IQ ratings are a measure of an
individual’s capacity for learning something new; they are scales
based upon how old in years a person has become compared to
how “old,” he is mentally. (SOS, p. xxi) 2. the degree that a
person can observe, understand actions. (SH Spec 100, 6201C16)

IRRATIONALITY, the inability to get right answers from data.
(DMSMG, p. 16)

IRS, instant rock slam. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

IS-ES, THE, Slang. the four conditions of existence. (PXL, p. 214)
[These four conditions are listed separately under AS-ISNESS,
ALTER-ISNESS, IS-NESS, NOT-ISNESS.]

217
IS-NESS

IS-NESS, 1. is-ness is an apparency of existence brought about by
the continuous alteration of an as-isness. This is called, when
agreed upon, reality. (PXZ, p. 154) 2. something that is
persisting on a continuum. That is our basic definition of is-ness.
(PXL, p. 91) 3. is-ness is an apparency, it is not an actuality.
(PXL, p. 175)

“ISSUE I”, first issue of that date. [“issue” as seen on HCOBs and
HCO PLs.] (HCOB 4 Sept 71 II)

ITEM, 1. any one of a list of things, people, ideas, significances,
purposes, etc., given by a preclear to an auditor while listing;
any separate thing or article; in particular, one placed on a list
by a pe. (Dn Today, p. 1028) 2. somatic or sensation etc. (HCOB
27 May 70) 3. any terminal, opposition terminal, combination
terminal, significance, or idea (but not a doingness, which is
called “a level”) appearing on a list derived from the pe. (HCOB
8 Nov 62) Symbol IT.

ITSA, 1. the action of the pe saying “It’s a this or it’s a that.”
(HCOB 6 Nov 64) 2. letting the pe say what’s there that was put
there to hold back a confusion or problem. (HCOB 1 Oct 63) 3. pe
saying what ts, what is there, who is there, where it is, what it
looks like, ideas about, decisions about, solutions to, things in
his environment. The pc talking continuously about problems or
puzzlements or wondering about things in his environment, is
not itsaing. (HCOB 16 Oct 63) 4. a pe who is itsaing is simply
looking at and identifying some thing. (SH Spec 320, 6310C31)
5. TA comes from saying “It is . . .” Itsa isn’t even a comm line.
It’s what travels on a comm line from pe to auditor, if that which
travels is saying with certainty “It is.” (HCOB 1 Oct 63)

ITSA LINE, the pc’s line to the auditor. (HCOB 23 May 71 III)

ITSA MAKER LINE, the pe’s line to his bank. (HCOB 23 May 71
III)

IVORY TOWER RULE, the case supervisor is most successful
when he supervises in seclusion. This is called the Ivory Tower
rule. (HCOB 8 Aug 71)

218
J

JAMMING THE TRACK, Slang. sticking, holding the time track.
(PAB 106)

JEALOUSY, is basically an inability to confront the unknown.
(SH Spec 48, 6108C22)

JIGGLE-JIGGLE, needle manifestation. A vibration. You’ve got
somebody with an alternating current ridge. (SH Spec 1,
6105C07)

JOBURG, a comprehensive security checklist developed in Jo-
hannesburg, South Africa. (Abil 218)

JOINT POSITION, the recall of bodily attitudes. (SOS Gloss)

JUDICIARY DIANETICS, covers the field of adjudication within
the society and amongst the societies of man. Of necessity it
embraces jurisprudence and its codes and establishes precision
definitions and equations for the establishment of equity. It is
the science of judgment. (DMSMH, p. 402)

JUMP CHAINS, the main liability (in Dn auditing) of pushing a pe
past a win is that he may “jump chains” and begin another chain
with no assessment. (HCOB 23 Jun 69)

219
JUNIOR CASE

JUNIOR CASE, if father was named George and the patient is

_ called George, beware of trouble. The engram bank takes
George to mean George and that is identity thought de luxe. A
junior case is seldom easy. (DMSMH, p. 305)

JUSTICE, 1. the action of the group against the individual when
he has failed to get his own ethics in. (HCOB 15 Nov 72 II)
2. could be called the adjudication of the relative rightness or
wrongness of a decision or an action. (AP&A, p. 10)

JUSTIFICATION, explaining away the most flagrant wrong-
nesses. Most explanations of conduct, no matter how far
fetched, seem perfectly right to the person making them since
he or she is only asserting self-rightness and other-wrongness.
(HCOB 22 Jul 63)

JUSTIFIED THOUGHT, the attempt of the analytical mind to
explain the reactive, engramic, reactions of the organism in the
ordinary course of living. Justified thought is the effort of the
conscious mind to explain away aberration without admitting, as

’ it cannot do normally, that it has failed the organism. (DTOT,
p. 42) ‘

JUSTIFIER, 1. the technical term we apply to the “mock-up” or
overt act demanded by a person guilty of an unmotivated act.
(COHA, p. 156) 2. a mocked up motivator. (8ACC-16, 5410CM21)

JUSTIFIER-HUNGRY, an act must be considered harmful or evil
to be an overt act. To need a justifier a person must have
believed his act to have been harmful. In that a thetan cannot
possibly, actually, be harmed, any harmful act he performs is an
unmotivated act. As the thetan cannot experience a motivator-
overt act sequence, we have the dwindling spiral. He is always
justifier hungry. Thus he punishes and restimulates himself.
Thus he is always complaining about what others do to him.
Thus he is a problem to himself. (COHA, p. 156)

220
K

KEEPER OF TECH, is the highest technically trained personnel
in the field. He/she is usually located in a very specific area
(Church), where they can be contacted and communicated with
any time. The major duty of any Keeper of Tech is to ensure
that the standard of Dn and Sen technology, processing and case
supervision is applied and maintained as originated by LRH, as
its 100 per cent rate, in the area they are keeping tech in. (FO
2354)

KERFUFFLE, Slang. an upset. (SH Spec 45, 6411003)

KEYED-OUT CLEAR, 1. when you find what lock words have
been tied into the GPMs in this or even an earlier lifetime and
key them out (destimulate them) (untie them from the main
mass) the GPMs sink back into proper alignment and cease
being effective. This makes a key-out Clear. This condition is -
valuable because the GPMs are now confrontable one by one
(not dozens by dozens) and Routine 6 can be run easily on the
preclear. (HCOB 17 Oct 64 III) 2. this is a simulated Clear, we
call it a “keyed-out Clear” quite properly. But it isn’t a Clear, it’s
a release. The person has been released from his reactive mind.
He still has that reactive mind but he is not in it. He is just
released from it. (HCOB 2 Apr 65)

221
KEYED-OUT OT

KEYED-OUT OT, 1. released OT. (HCOB 30 Jun 65) 2. the pc is
still a pre-clear though a keyed-out OT. This really isn’t a thetan
exterior. The thetan exterior is quite unstable and can be
attained below an ordinary first stage release. Keyed-out OT is
not done by routine auditing, being an offshoot of it that
happens sometimes. (HCOB 28 Jun 65)

KEY-IN, v. 1. the action of recording a lock on a secondary or
engram. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) —x. 1. the first time an engram is
restimulated is called a key-in. A key-in is merely a special kind
of lock, the first lock on a particular engram. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 29)
2. a moment when the environment around the awake but
fatigued or distressed individual is itself similar to the dormant
engram. At that moment the engram becomes active. It is
keyed-in and can thereafter be dramatized. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 136)

KEY-OUT, v. 1. an action of the engram or secondary dropping
away without being erased. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) —7n. 1. the

person without knowing what the earlier instance was has had
the lock vanish. That’s a key-out. (SH Spec 122, 6203C19) —adj.

Key Out (Def. 1)

222
KNOWLEDGE

1. released from the stimulus-response mechanisms of the
reactive mind. (PXL, p. 18) 2. release or separation from one’s
reactive mind or some portion of it. (PXL, p. 252)

KINESTHESIA, 1. by kinesthesia we perceive motion through
space and time. (SOS, p. 59) 2. weight and muscular motion.
(DMSMH, p. 46)

KINETIC, something which has considerable motion. (Sen 8-80,
p. 43)

KINETIC MOTION, something that’s moving. Or a potentiality of
motion. (PDC 18)

KNOW BEST, a technical and admin term. In tech it refers to an
auditor who in misapplying a process on a pe considers he knows
more than is actually contained in the technical bulletins on the
subject and uses this “know best” as a basis for altering technical
procedure. In admin it refers similarly to a person who considers
he has a better way of accomplishing something than is
contained in the policy letters covering that subject and messes
things up. Management then finds itself left with the task of
correcting that person’s goofs by applying the correct standard
policy to the area. In English, it is a derogatory term meaning
the person is pretending to know while actually being stupid.
(LRH Def. Notes)

KNOWING CAUSE, the person at cause is there because he
knows he is there and because he is willingly there. The person
at cause is not at cause because he does not dare be at effect. He
must be able to be at effect. If he is afraid to be at effect, then
he is unwilling cause and is at cause only because he is very
afraid of being at effect. (SCP, p. 9)

KNOWINGNESS, 1. being certainness. (PAB 1) 2. a capability for
truth; it is not data. (PDC 47) 3. knowingness would be
self-determined knowledge. (5405C20)

KNOWLEDGE, 1. by knowledge we mean assured belief, that
which is known information, instruction; enlightenment, learn-
ing; practical skill. By knowledge we mean data, factors and
whatever can be thought about or perceived. (FOT, p. 76) 2.
knowledge is more than data; it is also the ability to draw
conclusions. (DAB, Vol. II, p. 69) 3. a whole group or subdivi-
sion of a group of data or speculations or conclusions on data or
methods of gaining data. (Scn 0-8, p. 67)

223
KNOW-POINT

KNOW-POINT, a know-point is senior to a viewpoint. An
individual would not have dependency on space or mass or
anything else. He’d simply know where he was. (PXL, p. 257)

KNOW-TO-MYSTERY SCALE, the scale of affinity from know-
ingness down through lookingness, emotingness, effortingness,
thinkingness, symbolizingness, eatingness, sexingness and so
through to not-knowingness-mystery. The know-to-sex scale
was,the earlier version of this scale. (PXL, p. 49)

KOT, Keeper of Tech. (FO 2354)

K

R C

KRC Triangle

KRC TRIANGLE, the upper triangle in the Scn symbol. The
points are K for knowledge, R for responsibility, and C for
control. It is difficult to be responsible for something or control
something unless you have knowledge of it. It is folly to try to
control something or even know something without responsi-
bility. It is hard to fully know something or be responsible for
something over which you have no control, otherwise the result
can be an overwhelm. Little by little one can make anything go
right by: increasing KNOWLEDGE on all dynamics, increasing
RESPONSIBILITY on all dynamics, increasing CONTROL on all
dynamics. (HCO PL 18 Feb 72)

KUCDEIOF, know, unknow, curious, desire, enforce, inhibit,
none of it, false. (SH Spec 296, 6308C20)

224
L

L, all lists have been in HCOBs as “L.” (HCOB 19 Aug 63) [In this
dictionary, the Sen and Dn lists will be found under LIST.] See
also CORRECTION LIST.

LACC, London Advanced Clinical Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
LAM, London Auditors’ Meetings. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LAMBDA, 1. Dianetic Axiom 11: A life organism is composed of
matter and energy in space and time, animated by theta.
Symbol: Living organism or organisms will hereafter be repre-
sented by the Greek letter Lambda. (Dn Today, p. 968) 2. a
chemical heat engine existing in space and time motivated by
the life static and directed by thought. (Dn Today, p. 969)

L & A, Logics and Axioms Lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
L&N, Listing and Nulling. (HCOB 20 Apr 72 II)

L&N LIST, a list of items given by a pc in response to a listing
question and written down by the auditor in the exact sequence
that they are given to him by the preclear. An L&N list is
always done on a separate sheet. (BTB 7 Nov 72 III)

225
LANGUAGE

LANGUAGE, 1. the symbolization of effort. (Sen 0-8, p. 82) 2. the
communications of agreements and disagreements. (PDC 27)
3. symbolized object or condition or state of being. (PDC 44)

LANGUAGE LOCKS, locks in which the main aberrative content
is in terms of language. These may be considered symbolic
restimulators of mest locks, which are more fundamental. (SOS
Gloss)

LARGE READS, 1/3 of a dial or more at sensitivity 5. (HCOB 24
Jan 65)

LARGE THETA BOP, a quarter of a dial to a third of the dial.
(Cert, Vol. 5, No. 9, 1958)

LAST GPM, closest to PT. (SH Spec 307, 6309C17)

LATENT READ, 1. a read which occurs later than completion of
the major thought being expressed in words by the auditor.
(HCOB 25 May 62) 2. if the needle doesn’t fall or react for a
second or more after the question is asked, and then reacts, this
is a latent read. (HCOB 6 Jul 61)

LATER ON THE TRACK, closer to PT. (HCOB 8 Apr 63)

LAUDABLE WITHHOLD, if it’s laudable to have done it, then
it’s not laudable to withhold it. All right, if it’s laudable to
withhold it then it must be coupled with, “You shouldn't ought
to have done it, it shouldn’t be done.” So one of the pair of the
overt or the withhold is always laudable and always desirable.
And the other one is undesirable. A laudable withhold is an
undesirable action. (SH Spec 100, 6201016)

LAUGHTER, 1. laughter plays a definite role in therapy. It is
quite amusing to see a preclear, who has been haunted by an
engram which contained great emotional charge, suddenly
relieve it, for the situation, no matter how gruesome it was,
when relieved, is in all its aspects a subject of great mirth.
Laughter is definitely the relief of painful emotion. (DMSMH,
p. 121) 2. this laughter is the reversing of charge residual in the
locks which depended for their fear content or antagonistic
content upon the basic engrams. (DTOT, p. 99)

226
LETTING THE PC HAVE HIS WIN

LAW OF AFFINITY, the law of affinity might be interpreted as
the law of cohesion; “affinity” might be defined as “love” in both
its meanings. Deprivation of or absence of affection could be
considered as a violation of the law of affinity. Man must be in
affinity with man to survive. (DMSMH, p. 106)

LAWS, the codified agreements of the people crystallizing their
customs and representing their believed in necessities of
conduct. (PAB 96)

LCHP, London Congress of Human Problems. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LCNRH, London Congress on Nuclear Radiation and Health.
(HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LD, long duration. (HCOB 9 Aug 69)

LEARNING DRILL, THE, a drill used to improve the ability to
study and increase the learning rate. (BTB 10 Dec 70R)

LEAVE OF ABSENCE, an authorized period of absence from a
course granted in writing by a course supervisor and entered in
the student’s study folder. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

LECT, lecture. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LEFT-HAND BUTTON, a suppressor-type button. The nearly-
found-out is a left-hand button and does not necessarily read on
the meter. Suppress, careful of, nearly found out, fail to reveal.
They do not cause things to read, they prevent things from
reading. All the other buttons cause things to read unneces-
sarily. Anxious about tends to be a left-hand button. Protest
follows on a left-hand button so it tends to be the point where
the left and right side tie together. (SH Spec 229, 6301C10)

LEG OF A PROCESS, in a process with more than one command,
each command is called a “leg.” (HCOB 21 Jul 63)

L-11, New Life Rundown. (CG&AC 75) See also L9S.
‘L-11 EXPANDED, New Life Expansion Rundown. (CG&AC 75)

LETTING THE PC HAVE HIS WIN, a session that tries to go
beyond a big dial wide drifting floating F/N only distracts the pc

227
LEVEL

from his win. Big win. Any big win (F/N dial wide, cog, VGIs)
gives you this kind of persistent F/N. You at least have to let it
go until tomorrow and let the pce have his win. That is what is
meant by letting the pc have his win. When you get one of these
dial wide F/Ns, cog, VGIs, Wow! you may as well pack it up for
the day. (HCOB 8 Oct 70)

LEVEL, 1. grade and level are the same thing but when one has
a grade one is a pe and when one has a level one is studying its
data. (HCOB 2 Apr 65) 2. a segment of technical information or
performance for any application of Sen. (Aud 72 UK) 3. level
means “that body of Sen data for that point of progress of the
individual.” (Aud 72 UK) 4. any doingness or not doingness on
the pre-hav scale. Any word in the scale itself. (HCOB 7 Nov 62
III) Abbr. Lev.

LEVEL 0, see HRS.
LEVEL I, see HTS.
LEVEL II, see HCA.
LEVEL III, see HPA.
LEVEL IV, see HAA.
LEVEL V, see HVA.

LEVEL (5), STATE OF CASE, dub-in—some areas of track so
heavily charged, pe is below consciousness in them. (HCOB 8
Jun 63) [For a complete list of the 8 levels of case of SOP 8-C,
see STATE OF CASE SCALE.]

LEVEL VI, see HSS. [The SHSBC teaches to Level VI and results
in a Class VI auditor. However Grade VI is a solo-audit grade
and is not only done by a Class VI auditor but also by pes who
have attained Grade VA and have completed a special course
which teaches them to solo audit.]

LEVEL VII, Level VII contains the materials necessary to totally
erase the reactive mind. (SH Spec 71, 6607C26) [The Class VII
Course is the course which teaches auditors to audit the power
processes. Level VII or Clearing Course, as it is more often

228
LIFE

called, is done by pes who have successfully solo audited to
Grade VI Release, after which they may solo audit to Clear. ]

LEVEL OF AWARENESS, by level of awareness is meant that of
which a being is aware. There are about fifty-two levels of
awareness from unexistence up to the state of Clear. A being
who is at a level on this scale is aware only of that level and the
others below it. (HCO PL 5 May 65)

LF, long fall. (HCOB 29 Apr 69)
LFBD, long fall blowdown. (HCOB 29 Apr 69)
LGC, London Group Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LIE, 1. a second postulate, statement or condition designed to
mask a primary postulate which is permitted to remain. (PXL,
p. 180) 2. a statement that a particle having moved did not
move, or a statement that a particle not having moved, did
move. (PXL, p. 180) 3. an alteration of time, place, event and
form. (PXZL, p. 187) 4. invention with a bad connotation. (PAB
49)

LIE FACTORY, Slang. technically, a phrase contained in an
engram demanding prevarication—it was originally called a
fabricator. (DMSMH, p. 191)

LIE REACTION, questions originally used in Scientology only to
study the needle pattern of the person being checked so that
changes in it could then be judged in their true light. Some pcs
for instance, get a slight fall every time any question is asked.
Some get a fall only when there is heavy charge. Both can be
security checked by studying the common pattern of the needle
demonstrated in asking the lie reaction questions. (HCO PL 25
Mar 61)

LIFE, 1. (understanding), when we say “life” we mean under-
standing, and when we say “understanding” we mean affinity,
reality and communication. To understand all would be to live at
the highest level of potential action and ability. Because life is
understanding it attempts to understand. When it faces the
incomprehensible it feels balked and baffled. (Dn 55/, p. 36) 2. a

229
LIFE AND LIVINGNESS ENVIRONMENT

fundamental axiom of Dn is that life is formed by theta
compounding with mest to make a living organism. Life is theta
plus mest. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 3) 3. a static, which yet has the power
of controlling, animating, mobilizing, organizing and destroying
matter, energy and space, and possibly even time. (HFP, p. 24)
4. a thought or mind or beingness that conceives there are
forms, masses, spaces, and difficulties. (HPCA-64, 5608C--).
5. that which is posing and solving problems. (UPC 11) 6. life is
a game consisting of freedom, barriers and purposes. (Sen 0-8,
p. 119)

LIFE AND LIVINGNESS ENVIRONMENT, the workaday world
of the pc. (HCOB 1 Oct 63)

LIFE CONTINUUM, 1. one individual attempting to carry on the
life of another deceased individual or departed individual by
means of generating in his own body the infirmities and
mannerisms of the deceased or departed individual. (9ACC-24,
5501C14) 2. it is the restimulation of an individual’s desire to go
on living when he’s dying. (5112CM28B) 3. it is simply this:
somebody fails, departs or dies and the individual then takes on
the burden of this person’s habits, goals, fears, and _ idio-
syncrasies. (5112CM28B)

LIFE REPAIR PROGRAM, handles life areas. (HCOB 15 Jun 70)
[Note the referenced HCOB outlines the steps for this type of
program. ]

LIFE RUDS, as the person with out ruds makes no real gain it is
wise to put rudsin “in life.” This is done with, “In life have you
had an ARC break?” “In life have you had a problem?” “In life
have you had a withhold?” (HCOB 16 Aug 69)

LIFE STATIC, 1. a life static has no mass, no motion, no
wave-length, no location in space or time. It has the ability to
postulate and to perceive. (PXL, p. 146) 2. the thought, soul,
vital part of you which animates this mest, the body. (HFP,
p. 75)

LIFE UPSET INTENSIVE, this is a five hour or so intensive. It is
the ARC break routine mostly. (LRH ED 57 INT)

LIGHT OBJECTIVE PROCESSES, light objective (look outward,
take attention off body) processes. (Abil Mi 244)

230
LINES, BASIC FOUR

LIGHT PROCESSING, 1. light processing deals with postulates
and effects and can be done either on an individual or co-
auditing basis. (DAB, Vol. II, p. 173) 2. includes analytical recall
of conscious moments. It is intended to raise tone and increase
perception and memory. (SA, p. 61)

LIMITED PROCESS, any process which makes the preclear
create is a limited process. Such processes as “Tell a lie” are
creative processes. (HCOB 11 Feb 60)

LIMITED TECHNIQUE, a technique which can be used only for a
short time beneficially, and after a certain period of time will
begin to cause deterioration. (2ACC 20B, 5312CM10)

LINE CHARGE, a prolonged spell of uncontrolled laughter or
crying which may be continued for several hours. Once started a
line charge can usually be reinforced by the occasional interjec-
tion of almost any word or phrase by the auditor. The line
charge usually signals the sudden release of a large amount of
charge and brings about a marked change in the case. (COHA,
p. 281)

LINE LISTING, when a goal is found, you then have a number of
lines. Called lines. And item by item you ask the question of
these lines. You ask the question of the lines of the pe and he
gives you the answer. And that is written down. And that is
called line listing. And when you have finished all the lines
completely there is a free needle on all of the lines. (SH Spec
195, 6309C27)

LINE PLOT, this consists of a heavy blue 13-inch (foolscap or
legal) sheet of paper, kept in the pe’s folder and kept up to date
every time a reliable item (or even last item “in”)is found. On
this line plot one column, the left-hand one, is reserved for
oppterms. The right-hand column is reserved for terms and lines
indicate whenever terms or oppterms are derived from each
other. A reliable.item is designated as such on this line plot with
the symbol R.I. Nonreliable items are not designated. The date
each line plot item was found is added after the item so it can be
found again in the auditor’s reports without a scramble. (HCOB
8 Nov 62)

LINES, BASIC FOUR, (1) Who or what would want .. . ? (2) Who
or what would not want... ? (3) Who or what would

231
LIST

oppose .. . ? (4) Who or what would not oppose . . . ? (HCOB
7 Nov 62)

LIST, see CORRECTION LIST and L & N LIST.

LISTEN STYLE AUDITING, at Level 0 the style is Listen Style
auditing. Here the auditor is expected to listen to the pc. The
only skill necessary is listening to another. Listen Style should
not be complicated by expecting more of the auditor than just
this: Listen to the pe without evaluating, invalidating or
interrupting. (HCOB 6 Nov 64)

LISTING, 1. the auditor’s action in writing down items said by the
pe in response to a question by the auditor. (HCOB 5 Dec 62)
2. this is something listed by the pc. The pc says it. It is from a
question. The auditor asks the question, the pc then gives him
items which the auditor then writes down from the pc. (Class
VIII No. 11) 3. a special procedure used in some processes
where the auditor writes down items said by the preclear in
response to a question by the auditor in the exact sequence that
they are given to him by the preclear. (Sen AD) 4. in listing,
today the correct L&N item must BD and F/N. (HCOB 20 Apr
72 II)

LISTING AND NULLING, 1. this is something listed by the pc,
the pe says it. It is from a question. The auditor asks the
question, the pce then gives him items which the auditor then
writes down from the pc. (Class VIII No. 11) 2. you ask a
question of the pc, the pe gives you item, item, item, item. The
auditor writes them down and then he nulls the list. And there
must only be one item which has any read in it of any kind
whatsoever on that list. (Class VIII No. 11) Also see LISTING,
see NULLING.

LISTING METER, a real cheap meter that was beautifully
designed, but basically one that would do a power of good as far
as listing is concerned, so that you wouldn't miss reads. (SH
Spec 256, 6304C02)

LIST ONE, 1. a list of Sen items. This includes Sen, Sen
organizations, an auditor, clearing, auditing, Scientologists, a
session, an E-meter, a practitioner, the auditor’s name, Ron,
other Sen persons, parts of Sen, past auditors, etc. This list is

232
LIVINGNESS

composed by the auditor, not the pc. (HCOB 23 Nov 62) 2. this is
the list one of Routine 2-12. The Sen list is called List One.
(HCOB 24 Nov 62)

LISTS, all lists have been in HCOBs as “L.” (HCOB 19 Aug 63)
[Below are some of the lists which begin with L. Other Sen and
Dn lists and their usages will appear alphabetically as they occur
(e.g. WCCL will be found under W.)] (a) LCR=Confessional
Repair List. (FBDL 245) (b) LI=List One. (HCOB 23 Aug 65) (c)
L1C=List 1C, used by auditors in session when an upset occurs,
or as ordered by the C/S. Handles ARC broken, sad, hopeless or
nattery pes. (HCOB 19 Mar 71) [Earlier numbered L1, L1-A and
L1-B.] (d) L1R=Integrity Processing Repair List. The rule of
Integrity processing is that it should always end on an F/N,
When it does not F/N however (which includes F/Ning at the pe
examiner) or pc is upset, gets sick, or not doing well after
Integrity processing, this list must be used to repair the pc.
(HCOB 8 Jan 72R) (e) LIX Hi-Lo TA List=this assessment
has been developed to detect all the reasons for high and low
TA. It is used when a C/S Series 53 has been done and the high
or low TA persists. (HCOB 1 Jan 72RA) (f) L3B=[the Dn repair
list prior to the L3RD, which revised it.] (g) L3EXD=this list
includes the most frequent Dn errors and is amended for
Expanded Dn only. (BTB 2 Apr 72RB II) (h) L3RD=this list
includes the most frequent Dn errors. A high or low TA and a
bogged case can result from failures to erase a chain of
incidents. Take any read found to F/N by full repair of it per the
instructions. (HCOB 11 Apr 71RA) (i) L4BR=used for assess-
ment of all listing errors, when trouble occurs on a listing
process, when TA goes high or pc gets sick or upset after a
session which included listing action. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)
[Earlier numbered L4 and L4-A.] See CORRECTION LIST.

LIVE QUESTION, 1. unflat question. (HCOB 18 Dec 72R)
2. question unflat, needle reaction on a question. (HCOB 19 Oct
61)

LIVINGNESS, is going along a certain course impelled by a
purpose and with some place to arrive. It consists mostly of
removing the barriers in the channel, holding the edges firm,

233
L9S

ignoring the distractions and reinforcing and re-impelling one’s
progress along the channel. That’s life. (SH Spec 57, 6504C06)

L9S, a process called L9-Short (originally called L10s but renamed
for proper issue) The New Life Rundown. The New Life
Rundown has exact steps. Well done it gives a new life in truth.
(HCOB 17 Jun 71) [Now called L-11 per CG&AC 75.]

LOC, locational. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

LOCATIONAL, 1. a process called locational. Command: “Have
you got an auditing room?” Locational is only one of many
spotting processes. (SCP, pp. 27-28) 2. “Locate the
The auditor has the preclear locate the floor, the ceiling, the
walls, the furniture in the room and other objects and bodies.
(HCOTB 6 Feb 57) 3. “Look at that object”. (HCOB 2 Nov 57RA)

LOCATIONAL PROCESSING, the object of locational processing
is to establish an adequacy of communication terminals in the
environment of the preclear. It can be run in busy thorough-
fares, graveyards, confused traffic or anywhere there is or is not
motion of objects and people. Commands: “Notice that
(person).” (Op Bull No. 1) Abbr. Loc.

LOCATIONAL SPOTTING, one directs the pc’s attention with
“You notice that (object)” all about the room and at first only
occasionally includes the pe’s body and the auditor’s body in the
spotting. Then the auditor, using the same process, concen-
trates less and less upon the room and more and more upon the
auditor and the pc. It will be found that the pe will eventually
find the auditor with his attention so directed. (SCP, p. 20)

LOCK, 1. an analytical moment in which the perceptics of the
engram are approximated, thus restimulating the engram or
bringing it into action, the present time perceptics being
erroneously interpreted by the reactive mind to mean that the
same condition which produced physical pain once before is now
again at hand. Locks contain mainly perceptics; no physical pain
and very little misemotion. (SOS, p. 112) 2. a situation of mental
anguish. It depends for its force on the engram to which it is
appended. The lock is more or less known to the analyzer. It’s a
moment of severe restimulation of an engram. (EOS, p. 84) 3.

234
LOCK SCANNING

those parts of the time track which contain moments the pe
associates with key-ins. (HCOB 15 May 63) 4. conscious level
experiences which sort of stick and the individual doesn’t quite
know why. (SH Spec 72, 6607C28)

Lock

LOCK END WORDS, words that are not in the GPMs but which,
occurring later, are close in meaning to significances that are
part of the GPMs and so lock into a GPM and restimulate it.
They keep large parts of the reactive mind in restimulation.
(LRH Def. Notes)

LOCKS, mental image pictures of non-painful but disturbing
experiences the person has experienced. They depend for their
force on secondaries and engrams. (HCOB 12 Jul 65)

LOCK SCANNING, one contacts an early lock on the track and
goes rapidly or slowly through all such similar incidents straight
to present time. One does this many times and the whole chain
of locks become ineffective in influencing one. (HFP, pp. 99-100)

235
LOCK WORDS

LOCK WORDS, words not in the GPMs but close in meaning.
(HCOB 17 Oct 64 III)

LOE, London Open Evening Lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LOGIC, 1. a gradient scale of association of facts of greater or
lesser similarity made to resolve some problem of the past,
present or future, but mainly to resolve and predict the future.
Logic is the combination of factors into an answer. (Scn 8-8008,
p. 46) 2. the gradient scale and comparisons of data which work
out a smooth network of terminals and communication lines
which deliver data in a prediction of future form or theta
beingness. (Spr Lect 6, 5303CM25) 3. primitive logic was
one-valued. Everything was assumed to be the product of a
divine will, and there was no obligation to decide the rightness
or wrongness of anything. Most logic added up merely to the
propitiation of the gods. Aristotle formulated two-valued logic.
A thing was either right or wrong. This type of logic is used by
the reactive mind. In the present day, engineers are using a sort
of three-valued logic which contains the values of right, wrong,
and maybe. From three-valued logic we jump to an infinity-
valued logic—a spectrum which moves from infinite wrongness
to infinite rightness. (NOTL, p. 17) 4. rationalism, for all logic is
based upon the somewhat idiotic circumstance that a being that
is immortal is trying to survive. (Sen 8-8008, p. 47) 5. the
subject of reasoning. (HCO PL 11 May 70)

LOL, life or livingness. (SH Spec 225, 6212C13)

LONG FALL, an E-meter read of two to three inches. (HCOB 29
Apr 69) Abbr. LF.

LONG FALL BLOWDOWN, a long fall followed by a blowdown or
TA motion downward. (HCOB 29 Apr 69) Abbr. LFBD.

LON LECT, London Lecture. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LOOP, a redoubling of the time track, back on itself. In this case
incidents are not in their correct place on the time track.
(DTOT, p. 142)

LOSE, intending to do something and not doing it, and intending
not to do something and doing it. (SH Spec 278, 6806C25)

236
LOVE

ie

| ( ) Loss

LOSS, something has withdrawn from a thetan without his
consent. This would be the definition of loss. (COHA, p. 210)

LOSS OF HAVINGNESS, see DEPLETION OF HAVINGNESS.

LOSS OF VIEWPOINT, where he has had an ally who is dead, he
has once had a viewpoint which was alive and now can no longer
use that viewpoint. This is the basic loss and the basic occlusion.
It is the loss of a viewpoint. (PAB 2)

e

ce)
‘

Love

LOVE, 1. love, as a word, has too many meanings, and so we use
an old, old word, affinity, as meaning the love or brotherhood

237
LOWER HARMONIC

from one dynamic to another. (HFP, p. 41) 2. the human
manifestation of admiration. (PAB 8) 3. an intensity of happiness
addressed in a certain direction. (SA, p. 93)

LOWER HARMONIC, it is a lower similarity which is nutty which
is actually based on something like it higher on the scale which
isn’t. It means a co-action or similar. (SH Spec 83, 6612C06)

LOWER ON THE SCALE, means lower toned or means in worse
shape. (5707C17)

LOW TA, 1. below 2.0 on the tone arm. (HCOB 11 May 69 II)
2. the low TA is a symptom of an overwhelmed being. When a pe’s
TA goes low he is being overwhelmed by too heavy a process,
too steep a gradient in applying processes or by rough TRs or
invalidative auditing or auditing errors. A low TA means that
the thetan has gone past a desire to stop things and is likely to
behave in life as though unable to resist real or imaginary
forces. (HCOB 16 Jun 70)

LOW-TONE CASE, can be at clear read, unreactive on a sticky
sort of needle. He cannot however do things in life. He or she

cannot answer questions intelligently about help or control.
(EME, p. 9)

LPC, London Professional Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
LPLS, London Public Lecture Series. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

LRH, L. Ron Hubbard, Founder and Source of Dianetics and
Scientology and Commodore of the Sea Organization. (HCO PL
13 Jul 73)

LT, lifetime. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

LTD, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: Goes to HCO
Area Secs, HCO Cont, HCO WW only but never to central
organizations or field or public. (HCO PL 22 May 59)

LTD CONT, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulle-
tins indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: Goes to
HCO Cont only plus HCO WW. (HCO PL 22 May 59)

238
LYING

LTD WW, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: Goes to HCO
WW personnel only. (HCO PL 22 May 59)

L-10, there are now three L-10s: L-10S for “short,” L-10M for
“medium,” for those not yet OT, and L-10-OT for those on OT
grades III or above. (LRH OODs Command Item, 17 May 71)

L-10M, the Flag OT Executive Rundown, delivers OT capability
to executives being trained on Flag. The technical name of it is
“L-10M.” (HCOB 8 Jun 71 ITI) [Now called L-12 per CG&AC 75.]

L-10-OT, an upper level rundown whose basic tech comes from
research into increasing OT powers. (CG&AC 75)

L-12, the Flag OT Executive Rundown. (CG&AC 75) See also
L-10M.

LUCK, 1. by luck we mean “destiny not personally guided.” Luck
is only necessary amid a strong current of confusing factors.
(POW, p. 21) 2. the hope that some uncontrolled chance will get
one through. Counting on luck is an abandonment of control.
That’s apathy. (POW, p. 25)

LUMBOSIS, 1. a very famous Sen disease. (IMACC-27, 5911C26)
2. a weird disease that is only known in Sen. (SH Spec 66,
6509C09)

LX LISTS, there are now three “LX” lists: LX3=attitudes,
LX2=emotions, LX1=conditions. Originally they were called
“X” because they were experimental. These serve to isolate
reasons a being is charged up to such an extent that he is out of
valence. When a person is out of valence he does not easily as-is
his bank. (HCOB 2 Aug 69, LX Lists)

LYING, 1. lying is an alteration of time, place, event or form.
Lying becomes alter-isness, becomes stupidity. (COHA, p. 20)
2. the lowest form of creativity. (FOT, p. 25)

239
M

M, stands for males on the E-meter. (SH Spec 195A, 6209C27)

MA, designation on HCO Policy Letters and HCO Bulletins
indicates dissemination and restriction as follows: Magazine
Article. To go into any and all official magazines. (HCO PL 22
May 59)

MAA, master at arms. This is a naval term used in the Sea Org
and is equivalent (but senior) to the ethics officer in a Scien-
tology Church. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

MACC, Melbourne Advanced Clinical Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

MACHINE, 1. an actual machine in the mind, (like ordinary
machinery) constructed out of mental mass and energy, that has
been made by the individual to do work for him, usually having
been set up so as to come into operation automatically under
certain predetermined circumstances. (Scn AD) 2. a very special
kind of circuit, and they have wheels and cogwheels and belts
and barrels and steam boilers and electronic electrodes and dials
and switches and meters, almost anything you can think of as a
machine, you will find in some thetan’s bank as a machine, doing
something that any machine does. (5 LACC-10, 5811C07) 3. the
individual got disinterested in what he was doing but he felt he
had to go on doing it so he set it up automatically. (5410C10D)

MAGNETIC FIELD, strong electrical currents produce in the
vicinity of their flow what are called magnetic fields. If you wrap

241
MAJOR ACTION

an electrical wire around a bar of iron and run current through
the wire, you have a magnet. When you put a new piece of iron
near this magnet the field of the magnet snaps the piece of iron
up against the magnet. (HOM, p. 53)

MAJOR ACTION, any—but any—action designed to change a
case or general considerations or handle continual illness or
improve ability. This means a process or even a Series of
processes like three flows. It doesn’t mean a grade. It is any
process the case hasn’t had. (HCOB 24 May 70R)

MAJOR THOUGHT, by major thought is meant the complete
thought being expressed in words by the auditor. (HCOB 25
May 62)

MAN, 1. man is actually a body run by an awareness of awareness
unit which has infinite survival power—even though it can get
into a great deal of trouble. (Abil Mi 5) 2. a structure of cells
which are seeking to survive, and only to survive. (DMSMH,
p. 50) 3. a composite being of four distinct and divisible actual-
ities: these parts are termed the thetan, the memory banks, the
genetic entity and the body. (Sen 8-8008, p. 7) 4. man is basically
a machine only as far as his body goes. Man is otherwise a
spiritual entity which has no finite survival. It has, this entity,
an infinite survival. (Abil Mi 5) See HOMO SAPIENS.

MANAGEMENT POWER RUNDOWN, the Management Power
Rundown was developed at Flag to increase the trained skill of
any church student and greatly enhance the most valuable final
product of a Church Academy—a student able to use and apply
brilliantly, the skills taught. This rundown solves the basic why
of learning slowness, misunderstoods, third dynamic and
management aberration, chronic illness and what is commonly
referred to as “psychosis.” (HCOB 11 Dec 70) Abbr. MPR.

MANIC, 1. a _ highly complimentary prosurvival engram.
(DMSMH, p. 233) 2. an engram which is highly complimentary
and any compliment which it contains in it will be obeyed to its
most literal fullest extent. (5009CM28) 3. the extremes of too
quiet and never quiet have a number of psychiatric names such
as “catatonia” (withdrawn totally) and “manic” (too hectic).
(HCOB 24 Nov 65)

242
MATCHING TERMINALS

MANIC DEPRESSIVE, symptomatic of a person being next to an
undetected suppressive. (SH Spec 67, 6509C21)

MARCAB CONFEDERACY, various planets united into a very
vast civilization which has come forward up through the last
200,000 years, is formed out of the fragments of earlier
civilizations. In the last 10,000 years they have gone on with a
sort of a decadent kicked-in-the-head civilization that contains
automobiles, business suits, fedora hats, telephones, spaceships.
A civilization which looks almost exact duplicate but is worse
off than the current U.S. civilization. (SH Spec 291, 6308C06)

MASS (IN THE GPM), 1. when we say mass we mean mass. It’s
electronic standing waves actually, and they usually appear
black to the pe and these become visible. (SH Spec 96, 6112C21)
2. no more and no less than a confusion of mismanaged
communication. (Dn 55/, p. 65)

MASSES, masses are masses and they are not by the way
particles unless you consider particles as a subdivisible singular.
Masses are something that are shed from a thetan by mock-up
and particles are something that are shed from masses. That’s
usually the way we find things. (17 ACC-5, 5703PM01)

MASTER PROCESS, one which ran out all other processes and
processing. (HCOB 14 May 62)

MASTER PROGRAM, the master program for every case is given
on the Classification and Gradation Chart issued from time to
time. (HCOB 12 Jun 70)

MATCHED TERMINALS, the way one does matched terminals is
to have the preclear facing the preclear or his father facing his
father; in other words, two of each of anything, one facing the
other. These two things will discharge one into the other. Thus
running off the difficulty. (Sen 8-8008, p. 127) See also DOUBLE
TERMINALING.

MATCHING TERMINALS, putting up a person facing a person,
the same person facing the same person. (5304M07) See also
DOUBLE TERMINALING.

243
MATERIALS OF SCIENTOLOGY

MATERIALS OF SCIENTOLOGY, the materials of Sen are not
its tools. Its tools are processes—its materials are books, tapes,
Professional Auditor’s Bulletins, journals, letters and expe-
rience. (PAB 36)

MATERIAL UNIVERSE, the universe of matter, energy, space
and time. (Sen Jour 16-G)

MATTER, 1. a group of particles of energy located in a relatively
stable relationship to each other. (9ACC-24, 5501C14) 2. thought,
effort and emotion all in one place at the same time. (PDC
62) 3. a particle with no space to go anyplace. (PDC 16) 4. it
is evidently a very solid thought which is chaotic enough in its
arrangement of attention units that you can’t do too much about
it. (5206CM23B)

Matter (Def. 1)

MAYBE, |. simply a counter-balance insistence on must and must
not. It is and it is not. And these things equally insistent add up
into the indecisions of maybe. (SH Spec 28, 6107C12) 2. a maybe
is a double flow or a controversion to such a degree that an
individual is hung up on it. (Spr Lect 17, 5304CM08) 3. a
confusion of beingness, a confusion of doingness, and a confusion
of havingness, and it’s too badly balanced to resolve itself. (PDC
44) 4. neither no nor yes. (PDC 15)

MCSC, Mini Course Supervisor’s Course. (HCO PL 5 Nov 72R)

244
MEDIUM CLEAN NEEDLE

MEAN GRAPH, not an average graph. It’s just a graph that a
person isn’t in too bad shape, just sort of loused up, but they
kind of know it. (SH Spee 22, 6106C28)

MECHANICAL ABERRATION, there is a type of aberration
source which is simply the amount of charge there is on the
case. This might be called mechanical aberration. It does not
stem from specific commands but stems from mental inefficiency
by reason of cumulative entheta. Entheta by itself can charge up
a case to the point where the case will behave in certain definite
ways regardless of the command content of the engrams. (SOS,
Bk. 2, pp. 102-103)

MECHANICAL DEFINITION, called “mechanical” as it is defined
in terms of distance and position. Mechanical in this sense means
interpreting or explaining the phenomena of the universe by
referring to causally determined physical forces; mechanistic. A
being can put out objects to view (or anchor points) and also put
out points which will view them, even while the being himself is
elsewhere. Thus one can achieve space. “Mechanical” also
applies to “acting or performing like a machine—automatic.”
Thus a “mechanical definition” would be one which defined in
terms of space or location such as “the car over by the old oak
tree” or “the man who lives in the big house.” Here “the old oak
tree” and “the big house” are fixed objects and the unfixed
objects (“car,” “man’”) are a sort of viewpoint. One has identified
things by location. (LRH Def. Notes)

MECHANICS, 1. when we say mechanics we mean space, energy,
objects and time. And when something has those things in it
we're talking about something mechanical. (PXL, p. 166) 2. by
mechanics we mean any and all of the objects, motions, or
spaces which exist. Mechanics are always quantitative. There is
always just so much distance or so much mass or so many hours.
We have a word for mechanics compounded from matter,
energy, space, and time which is MEST. By MEST we mean any
or all arrangements of energy of whatever kind, whether in fluid
or object form, in space or spaces. (Dn 55/, p. 8)

MEDIUM CLEAN NEEDLE, offers many prior and latent reads,
but reads instantly when a question is asked. (HCOB 14 Jun 62)

245
MEDIUM DIRTY NEEDLE

MEDIUM DIRTY NEEDLE, agitated throughout check but with
periods of no agitation when a read can be obtained easily.
Reacts to checker’s voice (rudiments checker). (HCOB 14 Jun
62)

MEGALOMANIA, a person who has delusions of grandeur,
wealth, power, etc. (HCOB 11 May 65)

Megalomania

MEL 4, Melbourne 4. Process from ist Advanced Clinica] Course
in Melbourne. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

MEMORY, 1. a recording of the physical universe. Any memory
contains a time index (when it happened) and a pattern of
motion. As a lake reflects the trees and moving clouds, so does a
memory reflect the physical universe. Sight, sound, pain,
emotion, effort, conclusions, and many other things are recorded
in this static for any given instant of observation. Such a
memory we call a facsimile. (Scn 8-80, p. 13) 2. memory in Dn is
considered to be any concept of perceptions stored in the
standard memory banks which is potentially recallable by the
“I,” (DMSMH, p. 61) 3. memory usually means recalling data of
recent times. (HFP, p. 26) 4. memory would have the connota-
tion of you simply know it had happened. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)

246
MENTAL IMAGE PICTURES

MEMORY BANKS, STANDARD, the analytical mind has its
standard memory banks. Just where these are located structur-
ally is no concern of ours at this time. To operate, the analytical
mind has to have percepts (data), memory (data), and imagina-
tion (data), whether or not the data contained in the standard
memory banks is evaluated correctly or not, it is all there.
(DMSMH, p. 45)

MENTAL IMAGE PICTURES, 1. copies of the physical universe
as it goes by. (6101C22) 2. in Sen we call a mental image picture
a facsimile when it is a “photograph” of the physical universe
sometime in the past. We call a mental image picture a mock-up
when it is created by the thetan or for the thetan and does not
consist of a photograph of the physical universe. We call a
mental image picture an hallucination or more properly an
automaticity (something uncontrolled) when it is created by
another and seen by self. (FOT, pp. 56-57)

Mental Image Picture (Def. 1)

247
MERCHANTS OF CHAOS

MERCHANTS OF CHAOS, there are in our civilization some very
disturbing elements. These disturbing elements are the
Merchants of Chaos. They deal in confusion and upset. Their
daily bread is made by creating chaos. If chaos were to lessen,
so would their incomes. It is to their interest to make the
environment seem as threatening as possible, for only then can
they profit. Their incomes, force, and power rise in direct ratio
to the amount of threat they can inject into the surroundings of
the people. (NSOL, pp. 17-18) 2. Merchant of Fear or Chaos
Merchant and which we can now technically call the suppressive
person. (HCO PL 5 Apr 65)

MERCHANTS OF FEAR, 1. probably the truly aberrative
personalities in our society do not number more than five or ten
per cent. They have very special traits. Where you find in the
preclear’s bank a person with one or more of these character-
istics, you will have the person who most thoroughly tried the
preclear’s sanity. Such people would be better understood if I
called them the “Merchants of Fear.” (PAB 13) 2..We can now
technically call the suppressive person. (HCO PL 5 Apr 65,
Handling the Suppressive Person)

MESMERISM, mesmerism is no relation to hypnotism at all.
Mesmerism is animal magnetism. It’s a physiological rapport,
not a concentration on mental but on mental-physiological. (BTB
7 Apr 72R)

MEST, 1. a coined word, meaning matter, energy, space and
time, the physical universe. All physical phenomena may be
considered as energy operating in space and time. The move-
ment of matter or energy in time is the measure of space. All
things are mest except theta. (Abi 114-A) 2. the symbol for the
physical universe in use hereafter is mest, from the first letters
of the words matter, energy, space and time, or the Greek letter
phi (6). (HFP, p. 166) 3. simply a composite of energies and
particles and spaces which are agreed upon and which are
looked at. (PXL, p. 193) 4. a solid object, and the space and
energy and so forth which comprise such solid objects. (PDC 12)
5, any or all arrangements of energy, of whatever kind, whether
in fluid or object form, in space or spaces. (Dn 55!, p. 9)

248
MEST PERCEPTION

MEST BODY, 1. the physical body. The organism in all the mest
aspects. (SOS Gloss) 2. the mest body should not be thought of
as a harbor or vessel for the theta being. A better example
would be a sliver inserted unwantedly in the thumb where the
thumb would be the theta being, the mest body the sliver. Mest
bodies are good identification tags, they generate exciting
emotions, they are fun to operate at times, but they are no end
of existence. (HOM, p. 16)

MEST CLEAR, 1. by mest clear is meant a Book One clear. Here
we defined clear in terms of facsimiles. This is a rather simple
mechanical definition. It said in effect that so far as human
beings were concerned our preclear finally arrived at a point
where he had full color-visio-sonic, had no psychoses or neuroses
and could recall what had happened to him in this lifetime.
(SCP, p. 3) 2. someone who knows he has reached the bottom
rung of the ladder on his way up. He also knows the rest of
humanity uncleared is below this state but that they don’t know
that they are. A mest clear still thinks of himself more or less as
a body and is more or less subject to one. All engrams are
effectually keyed out without being examined. For practical
purposes they are erased. He has excellent recalls. They may or
may not be eidetic. (Abi! 87) 3. if a fellow can exist without
synthetic beingnesses, which are solutions to problems he can’t
confront, you’ve got a mest clear. He is still in a body. He’s got
body beingness yet, but he’s gotten rid of these synthetic
valences. (SH Spec 36, 6108C09)

MEST LOCKS, locks which come about through the inhibition or
enforcement of the individual’s experience or control of matter
or energy or space or time. It is postulated that the reduction of
the mest locks in which the individual was made to go up or not
permitted to come down will make any bouncer phrases in the
case inactive, and so on with all types of action phrases. (SOS
Gloss)

MEST PERCEPTICS, common garden-variety sense data—
perceptions, new and recorded, of matter, energy, space, and
time, and combinations of these. (SOS Gloss)

MEST PERCEPTION, recordings the thetan takes from the
organs of perception of the human body as a short cut to

249
MEST REALITY

perception (lazy perception). The body records actual wave
emanations from the mest universe, the thetan uses these
recordings. (Sen 8-8008 Gloss)

MEST REALITY, the reality which can be sensed, measured, and
experienced in the physical universe. (SOS, p. 97)

MEST STRAIGHTWIRE, self-analysis. (5209CM04A)

MEST TECHNIQUE, straightwire, repetitive straightwire (slow,
auditor-managed lock scanning), and lock scanning on mest
locks. Language locks are found by straightwire only as a clue to
the underlying mest locks. Mest technique and validation
technique may be combined and should be. (SOS Gloss)

MEST UNIVERSE, 1. that agreed-upon reality of matter, energy,
space and time which we use as anchor points and through
which we communicate. (Scn 8-8008, p. 27) 2. a mutual system of
barriers on which we have agreed so we can have a game.
(5311CM17A) 3. is a two-terminal universe. (Sen 8-8008, p. 31)

METALOSIS, Osis, Greek, action: process, condition abnormal
or diseased condition caused by. Metal, any of a large group of
substances (as bronze, steel) that typically show a characteristic
luster, are good conductors of electricity and heat, are opaque,
can be fused or are usually malleable or ductile. A psycho-
somatic condition caused by the interaction of body electric
flows and the magnetic and other fields of metal. The effect
takes a long time to occur. Engrams are formed. (LRH Def.
Notes)

METALOSIS RUNDOWN, the procedure used in Expanded
Dianetics to cure metalosis. (LRH Def. Notes) .

METAPHYSICS, 1. it means after physics because the original
classes in it were given in the period which immediately
followed the physics period. That is where that gets its name,
because it was the unexplained, inexplicable and upsetting
things that no one knew the answer of. (Unidentified LRH tape)
2. the study of the ultimate reality of all things. (B&C, p. 16)

METER, see E-METER.
250
MIDDLE RUDIMENTS

METER CHECK, 1. the action of checking the reaction of a
student to subject matter, words or other things, isolating
blocks to study, interpersonal relations or life. It is done with an
E-meter. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 HT) 2. the procedure whereby an
ethics officer or trained auditor establishes the state of a person
in regard to ethical or technical matters by using the technology
of the E-meter. (JSE, p. 40)

METER DEPENDENCE, meter dependence is created by invali-
dation by or poor acknowledgment of the auditor. If the auditor
seems not to accept the pe’s data, then the pc may insist that the
auditor “see it read on the meter.” This can grow up into a
formidable meter dependence on the part of the pc. (HCOB 13
Apr 64, Sen VI Part One Tone Arm Action)

M 1 to 9 (WC), see WORD CLEARING.

METHOD 1 ASSESSMENT, see ASSESSING, METHODS OF.
METHOD 2 ASSESSMENT, see ASSESSING, METHODS OF.
METHOD 3 ASSESSMENT, see ASSESSING, METHODS OF.
METHOD 4 ASSESSMENT, see ASSESSING, METHODS OF.
METHOD 5 ASSESSMENT, see ASSESSING, METHODS OF.
METHOD 6 ASSESSMENT, see ASSESSING, METHODS OF.
METHODS OF WORD CLEARING, see WORD CLEARING for

definitions of Methods 1-9 word clearing.

MID-CONFESSIONAL SHORT ASSESSMENT, see MID-IN-
TEGRITY PROCESSING SHORT ASSESSMENT.

MGMT, management. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

MID-INTEGRITY PROCESSING SHORT ASSESSMENT, for
use during an integrity processing session if a question won’t F/N
but before starting that question, the TA range was 2-3, or
there was an F/N. (BTB 7 Dec 72R)

MIDDLE RUDIMENTS, 1. middle rudiments are rudiments used
one after another; inquiries about various rudiments during a
session. Of course you are then to keep the session progressing
and keep the rudiments in. (SH Spec 45, 6108C24) 2. the middle

251
MID RUDS

rudiment consists of a package question which handles suppres-
sions, invalidations, missed withholds and “careful of.” This is
your standard, basic middle rudiment. (SH Spec 155, 6205C31)
3. middle rudiments may also contain (this is less often, but may
also contain) the half-truths, untruths, impress and damage end
rudiment; the question or command end rudiment; and the
influence of the E-meter rudiment. (SH Spec 155, 6205C31)
4, mid ruds are called mid ruds because middle of session was the
earliest use, plus rudiments of a session. (HCOB 14 Aug 64)

MID RUDS, middle rudiments. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

MIMICRY, 1. a non-verbal technique wherein the auditor mimics
the preclear and persuades the preclear to mimic the auditor.
Various processes are used, such as passing a ball back and forth
between them, nodding, shaking hands, sitting down, standing
up, walking across the room and back and sitting down, all of
which are effective. (Dn 55/, p. 110) 2. he does something, you
do something [the same thing], and therefore he becomes aware
that he’s doing it because he sees you doing it. (SH Spec 59,
6504C27)

MIND, 1. pictures which have been made of experiences and
plotted against time and preserved in energy and mass in the
vicinity of the being and which when restimulated are re-created
without his analytical awareness. (SH Spec 72, 6607C28) 2. a
literal record of experience plotted against time from the
earliest moment of aberration until now plus additional ideas the
fellow got about it, plus other things he may have mocked up or
created on top of it in mental mass, plus some machines, plus
some valences. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21) 3. a network of communi-
cations and pictures, energies and masses, which are brought
into being by the activities of the thetan versus the physical
universe or other thetans. The mind is a communication and
control system between the thetan and his environment. (FOT,
p. 56) 4. the purpose of the mind is to pose and resolve problems
relating to survival and to direct the effort of the organism
according to these solutions. (Sen 0-8, p. 76) 5. a natively
self-determined computer which poses, observes and resolves
problems to accomplish survival. It does its thinking with
facsimiles of experience or facsimiles of synthetic experience. It

252
MINUS SCALE RELEASE

is natively cause. It seeks to be minimally an effect. (HFP, p. 33)
6. the human mind is an observer, postulator, creator and
storage place of knowledge. (HFP, p. 163) 7. the mind is a
self-protecting mechanism and will not permit itself to be
seriously overloaded so long as it can retain partial awareness of
itself. (DMSMH, p. 165) 8. the mind is composed of energy
which exists in space and which condenses down into masses.
(SH Spec 133, 6204C17)

MINOR THOUGHT, by minor thoughts is meant subsidiary
thoughts expressed by words within the major thought. They
are caused by the reactivity of individual words within the full
words. Example: “Have you ever injured dirty pigs?” To the pe
the words “you,” “injured,” and “dirty” are all reactive. There-
fore, the minor thoughts expressed by these words also read on

the meter. (HCOB 25 May 62)

MINUS-FREEDOM, freedom is not the plus of a condition where
slavery is the minus unless we are dealing entirely with the
political organism. Where we are dealing with the individual
better terminology is necessary and more understanding of the
anatomy of minus-freedom is required. Minus-freedom is entrap-
ment. Freedom is the absence of barriers. Less freedom is the
presence of barriers. Entirely minus-freedom would be the
omnipresence of barriers. (Dn 55/, p. 55)

MINUS RANDOMITY, 1. from the viewpoint of the individual,
that thing which has too little motion in it for his tolerance is
minus randomity. (Abil 36) 2. a good statement of minus
randomity would be: things are too slow. Things are certainly
slow around here, life is dull, there is nothing happening. (Abid
86)

MINUS SCALE, the minus awareness levels of the Classification
Gradation and Awareness Chart. (HCOB 20 Sept 66)

MINUS SCALE RELEASE, there are several Grades of Release
below Zero, in the Minus Scale of the original complete
Gradation Chart. Many of the Minus Scale can be attained by
simple assessment. (And ceasing to assess the moment the
release occurs is vital—don’t keep on assessing as the same

253
MINUS TONE SCALE

session auditing action.) There are three specific Grades of
Release below Zero and above the lower Minus Scale. These are,
from lowest: Straightwire Release, Dianetic Secondary Release,
Dianetic Engram Release. (HCOB 20 Sept 66)

MINUS TONE SCALE, the subtones below the Emotional Tone
Seale which are so low as to constitute by the individual a
no-affinity, no-emotion, no-problem, no-consequence state of
mind on things which are actually tremendously important. (Scn

AD)

MIS-ACKNOWLEDGMENT, there are many ways to mis-
acknowledge a pc. But any mis-acknowledgment is only and
always a failure to end the cycle of a command. If the pe is not
sure he has answered and that the auditor has accepted the
answer, the pe will get no benefit from the auditing. (PAB 145)

MISASSESSMENT, multiple item or narrative item or both or
taking an item that doesn’t read or in which pc has no interest.
(HCOB 9 Aug 69)

MISASSIST, an incident wherein the preclear has tried to help on
some dynamic and failed. (HOM, p. 75)

MISCELLANEOUS REPORT, a report such as an MO report, a
D of P interview, an ethics report, a success story, etc. which is
put in the pe’s folder and gives a C/S more information about
the case. (BTB 3 Nov 72R)

MISDIRECTOR, 1. a phrase which, when the auditor sends the
preclear in one direction, makes the preclear go in another
direction. (SOS, p. 106) 2. a command which sends the preclear
in the wrong direction, makes him go earlier when he should be
going later, go later when he should go earlier, etc. “You can’t
go back at this point,” “You’re turned around,” etc. (DMSMH,
p. 218)

MISEMOTION, 1. anything that is unpleasant emotion such as
antagonism, anger, fear, grief, apathy or a death feeling. (HCOB
23 Apr 69) 2. emotion and misemotion include all levels of the
complete tone scale except “pain”; emotion and misemotion are
closely allied to “motion,” being only a finer particle action.
(HCOB 19 Jan 67)

254
MOCKERY BAND

MISEMOTIONAL, 1. such a word would indicate that a person
did not display the emotion called for by the actual circum-
stances of the situation. (SOS, p. 49) 2. being misemotional is
synonymous with being irrational. (SOS, p. 49)

MIS-MEMORY, forgettingness. (Abil SW, p. 11)

MISPROGRAMMED, the current program has neglected or
misplaced an urgently needed action. (BTB 23 Oct 71 V)

MISSED OVERT, a done, that people didn’t find out about. (SH
Spec 181, 6208007)

MISSED WITHHOLD, 1. an undisclosed contra-survival act
which has been restimulated by another but not disclosed.
(HCOB 3 May 62) 2. a missed withhold is a should have known.
The pc feels you should have found out about something and you
didn’t. (SH Spec 136, 6204C24) 3. the missed withhold is
something people nearly found out. It’s another person’s action.
It’s nothing the pe did or is doing. It is another person’s action
and the pe’s wonder about it. (SH Spec 206, 6211C01) Abbr.
M/W/H.

MISSED WITHHOLD OF NOTHING, 1. there is nothing there,
yet the auditor tries to get it and the pc ARC breaks. This gives
the pe a missed withhold of nothing. (HCO PL 16 Apr 65)
2. “cleaning” a rudiment that has already registered null gives
the pe a missed withhold of nothingness. His nothingness was -
not accepted. The pe has no answer. A missed no-answer then
occurs. To ask again something already null is to leave the pc
baffled—he has a missed withhold which is a nothingness.
(HCOB 4 Jul 62)

MISSED WITHHOLD PROGRAM, where the auditor searched
for and found when and where withholds had been available but
had been MISSED. (HCOB 8 Feb 62)

MISSION, a group granted the privilege of delivering elementary
Sen and Dn services. Does not have Church status or rights.
(BTB 12 Apr 72R)

MO, medical officer. (A bil 272)

MOCKERY BAND, there is a little band down very close to death
on the tone scale which is a mockery band and in that band
anything that’s in that band is a mockery of anything higher.
(5405CM12)

255
MOCK-UP

MOCK-UP, v. 1. to get an imaginary picture of. (COHA, p. 100)
—n. 1. “mock-up” is derived from the World War II phrase
which indicated a symbolized weapon or area of attack. Here, it
means in essence, something which a person makes up himself.
(Sen Jour, Iss 14-G) 2. a mock-up is more than a mental picture;
it is a self-created object which exists as itself or symbolizes
some object in the mest universe. It is a thing which one can be.
(Sen Jour, Iss 14-G) 3. a full perceptic energy picture in three
dimensions created by the thetan and having location in space
and time. Now, that’s the ideal definition. A mock-up is
something the thetan puts up and says is there. That’s what a
mock-up is. (9ACC-24, 5501C14) 4. we call a mental image
picture a mock-up when it is created by the thetan or for the
thetan and does not consist of a photograph of the physical
universe. (FOT, pp. 56-57) 5. any knowingly created mental
picture that is not part of a time track. (HCOB 15 May 63)

MODEL SESSION, 1. the same exact pattern and script (patter)
with which an auditing session is begun and ended; the overall
form of all Sen auditing sessions which is the same anywhere in
the world. (Scn AD) 2. its wording is very fixed. All refinements
of model session are in the direction of causing less ARC breaks
and getting more auditing done. (SH Spec 289, 6307C24) 3. the
patter wording of a model session is what is said and fixed. By
always using the same words to open, continue and close a
session, to begin and end processes, a duplication of sessions is
achieved which as they continue, runs them out. The patter
wording of a model session should be learned by heart and not
changed. (HCOB 26 Aug 60)

MODIFIER, a modifier is that consideration which opposes the
attainment of a goal and tends to suspend it in time. Example:

goal, “to be a willow wand;” modifier, “so as never to be
reached.” (HCOB 7 Nov 61)

MOISTURE PERCEPTION, moisture perception permits us to
sense the dampness or dryness of the atmosphere and so judge
further our environment. (SOS, p. 59)

MI CS 1, 1. method I word clearing CS 1. [as in case supervisor
direction.] (HCOB 14 Sept 71 II Revised 24 Sept 71) [Note this

256
MORALS

HCOB has been cancelled by HCOB 14 June 73 Word Clearing
C/S No. 1R Cancelled.| 2. standard C/S for word clearing in
session Method 1. (HCOB 30 Jun 71 II)

M 1 WC, Method One word clearing. (HCO PL 8 Jan 72 I) See
WORD CLEARING.

MONEY ASSIST, this action is simply a tool and use of our tech
to get the result of the person able to handle the subject of
money and take the major services of the Church. (BTB 1 Jul 73,
Money Assist)

MONITOR, could be called the center of awareness of the person.
It, inexactly speaking, 7s the person. It has been approximated
by various names for thousands of years, each one reducing
down to “I.” The monitor is in control of the analytical mind.
(DMSMH, p. 43)

MOOD DRILLS, developed to handle stuck or fixated auditor
moods or where some auditor’s mood entered into the session
would rough up or upset a pe or slow his progress. Mood drills
consist of TRs 1 to 4 done out of session on each tone level of the
full tone scale, hitting each mood up and down the scale. The
coach calls the mood, the auditor does TRs 1 to 4 in that mood.
It doesn’t really require much coaching. “You just start low on
the scale and TR that mood then the next, then the next. Like,
all TRs done “hopeless,” etc. Lots of laughs doing it really.
Doing TRs as a dead auditor is pretty tricky.” Once begun mood
drills should be continued until the whole scale is flat so the
auditor doesn’t get stuck on the tone scale but can do any mood
easily and without strain. (BTB 13 Mar 75)

MORAL CODE, 1. that series of agreements to which a person
has subscribed to guarantee the survival of a group. (SH Spec
62, 6110C04) 2. a series of solutions to problems which have not
been confronted or analyzed. (SH Spec 27X, 6107C04)

MORALS, x. pl. 1. the principles of right and wrong conduct.
(HCO PL 3 May 72) 2. morals should be defined as a code of
good conduct laid down out of the experience of the race to
serve as a uniform yardstick for the conduct of individuals and
groups. Such a codification has its place; morals are actually

257
MORES

laws. Morals are, to some degree, arbitraries, in that they
continue beyond their time. All morals originate out of the
discovery by the group that some act contains more pain than
pleasure. (SOS, p. 129) 3. are things which were introduced into
the society to resolve harmful practices which could not be
explained or treated in a rational manner. (5008C30) 4. those
things which are considered to be at any given time survival
characteristics. A survival action is a moral action and those
things are considered immoral which are considered contra-
survival. (SH Spec 62, 6110C04) 5. an arbitrary code of conduct
not necessarily related to reason. (Scn 8-8008, p. 100)

MORES, are those things which make a society possible. They are
the heavily agreed-upon, policed codes of conduct of a society.
(PAB 40)

MOTION, 1. uncomfortable perceptions stemming from the
reactive mind are called sensation. These are' basically “pres-
sure,” “motion,” “dizziness,” “sexual sensation,” and “emotion
and misemotion.” “Motion” is just that, a feeling of being in
motion when one is not. “Motion” includes the “winds of space,”
a feeling of being blown upon especially from in front of the face.
(HCOB 19 Jan 67) 2. dimension points, by shifting, can give the
viewpoint the illusion of motion. The viewpoint, by shifting, can
give the dimension points the illusion of motion. Motion is the
manifestation of change of viewpoint of dimension points. (Scn
8-8008, p. 16) 3. is a consecutive appear and disappear in
infinitely small gradients. (2ACC-19A, 5312CM09) 4. a change of
position in space. (HFP, p. 110)

MOTIVATOR, I. an aggressive or destructive act received by the
person or one of the dynamics. It is called a motivator because it
tends to prompt that one pays it back—it “motivates” a new
overt. (HCOB 20 May 68) 2. something which the person feels
has been done to him, which he is not willing to have happen.
(HCO Info Ltr 2 Sept 64) 3. an act received by the person or
individual causing injury, reduction or degradation of his being-
ness, person, associations or dynamics. (HCOB 1 Nov 68 II) 4. an
overt act against oneself by another. In other words, a moti-
vator is a harmful action performed by somebody else against
oneself. (8ACC-14, 5410CM20)

258
MPR

MOTIVATOR HUNGER, 1. a motivator is called a “motivator”
because it tends to prompt an overt. It gives a person a motive
or reason or justification for an overt. When a person commits
an overt or overt of omission with no motivator he tends to
believe or pretends that he has received a motivator which does
not in fact exist. This is a false motivator. Beings suffering from
this are said to have “motivator hunger” and are often aggrieved
over nothing. (HCOB 1 Nov 68) 2. Homo sapiens goes around
trying to get force applied hard enough so that he gets
sympathy for it and we call that motivator hunger. (2ACC-30B,
5312CM21)

MOTIVATORISH CASE, a preclear who only gets off motivators
in a session. The motivator case is well aware that each
motivator answer is not truly real, but reactively he is incapable
of looking at the cause side of the picture and considers any
effort on the part of anyone to attempt to get him to do so as an
effort on the part of that person to punish him or to make him
guilty. Such a person has many overts of blaming others and
uses any motivator as a justification of his overts against others.
(BTB 12 Jul 62)

MOTIVATOR-OVERT ACT, whereby something is done to the
preclear and then the preclear does the same thing to somebody
else. (PAB 18)

MOTOR CONTROL TIME TRACK, this time track is not
connected to the analytical mind and speech, but is apparently a
parallel time track with greater reliability than the sensory
track. The precision of data contained in the motor control time
track is enormous. The motor strip time track can be asked
questions down to the smallest moment of time, and the area of
an engram can be so located and its character determined.
(DTOT, pp. 88-89)

MOTOR STRIP, the pc’s sensory perceptions. (Exp Jour, Winter-
Spring, 1950)

MOTOR STRIP TIME TRACK, see MOTOR CONTROL TIME
TRACK.

MPR, see MANAGEMENT POWER RUNDOWN.
259
MS

MS, model session. (HCO PL 8 Dec 62)

MSH, Mary Sue Hubbard. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

M/U or MIS-U, abbreviation for misunderstood. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)
MULTIPLE ACKS, see DOUBLE ACKS.

MULTIPLE DECLARE, declaring Grades 0 to IV all at one time
mostly without any mention of the end phenomena of the grade.
(HCOB 30 Jun 70R)

MULTIPLE ILLNESS, the preclear is physically uncomfortable
or ill from several engrams of different types all restimulated.
(HCOB 23 Apr 69)

MULTIPLE SOMATICS, several somatics as one item. (HCOB 19
May 69, Health Form, Use of)

MULTIVALENCE, valens means “powerful” in Latin. It is a good
term because it is the second half of ambivalent (power in two
directions) and exists in any good dictionary. It is a good term
because it describes (although the dictionary did not mean it to)
the intent of the organism when dramatizing an engram.
Multivalence would mean “many powerfuls.” It would embrace |
the phenomena of split personality, the strange differences of
personality in people in one and then another situation. Valence
in Dn means the personality of one of the dramatic personnel in
an engram. (DMSMG&, p. 80)

MURDER ROUTINE, a slang title for the “worse than” tech-
nique. One gets the pc to give off his overts by inferring he has
done very bad things, including murder. Auditor, “Did you
murder your wife?” Pc, “Oh no! I only cheated on her!”
Described in full in BTB 30 Aug 72 I, issued 28 Mar 74 Ex Dn
Series 8. Actually developed in 1961 in South Africa. (LRH Def.
Notes) “

MUTTER TR, a drill to perfect the muzzled auditing comm cycle.
(1) The coach has student give command. (2) Coach mutters an
unintelligible answer at different times. (3) Student acknowl-
edges. (4) Coach flunks if student does anything else but

260
MYSTERY SANDWICH

acknowledge. This is the entirety of this drill. It is not to be
confused with any other training drill. (HCOB 1 Oct 65R)

MUTUALLY RESTIMULATIVE, two people may discover that
they are mutually restimulative—which is to say each is a
pseudo-person in the other’s engrams or one is restimulated
(voice tone, incidents) by the other. (DMSMH, p. 389)

MUTUAL OUT RUDS, this means two or more people who
mutually have ruds out on the wider group or other dynamics
and do not get them in. (HCOB 17 Feb 74)

MUZZLED AUDITING, 1. stating only the model session patter
and commands and TRs. It always gets the best results. (HCOB
20 Jul 72 II) 2. this could also be called rote style auditing.
Muzzled auditing has been with us many years. It is the stark
total of TRs 0 to 4 and not anything else added. Repetitive
command auditing, using TRs 0 to 4, at Level I is done
completely muzzled. (HCOB 6 Nov 64) 3. in muzzled auditing,
the auditor says only two things. He gives the command and
acknowledges the answer to that command. If the pe says
anything that is not an answer to that command, the auditor
nods his head and awaits an answer before giving acknowledg-
ment. (HCOB 25 Mar 59)

MUZZLED COACHING, the coach says fine when he thinks it is
fine and otherwise keeps his mouth shut. This is muzzled
coaching. (HCOB 29 Sept 59)

MW/H (also M/W/H), missed withhold. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

MYSTERY, 1. the anatomy of mystery is unprediction, confusion
and then total blackout. Mystery is the level of always
pretending there’s always something to know earlier than the
mystery. (PXZ, p. 170) 2. oblivion of knowing. (COHA, p. 151)
3. the glue that sticks thetans to things. (SH Spee 206, 6211C01)

MYSTERY SANDWICH, 1. the principle of mystery is, of course,
this: the only way anybody gets stuck to anything is by a
mystery sandwich. A person cannot be connected to his body,
but he can have a mystery between him and his body which will
connect him. You have to understand this thing about the

261
MYSTICAL MYSTIC

mystery sandwich. It’s two pieces of bread, one of which
represents the body, and one of which represents the thetan,
and the two pieces of bread are pulled together by a mystery.
They are kept together by a volition to know the mystery. (PAB
66) 2. a thetan stuck to anything is of course just a mystery
sandwich. Thetan, mystery, object—mystery sandwich. (SH
Spec 48, 6108C31)

MYSTICAL MYSTIC, Slang. a type of case. The person will be
totally reasonable about anything that happens in his vicinity
but not do anything about it, and see nothing but good in
anything including murdering babies. (SH Spec 42, 6410C13)

MYSTIQUE, qualifications or skills that set a person or thing
apart and beyond the understanding of an outsider. (HCO PL 29
Oct 71 IID)

262
N

NARCOSYNTHESIS, 1. a complicated name for a very ancient
process quite well known in Greece and India. It is drug
hypnotism. A shot of sodium pentothal is given intravenously to
the patient and he is asked to count backwards. It is actually a
depressant on the awareness of an individual so that those
attention units which remain behind the curtain of his reactive
mind can be reached directly. (DMSMH, p. 123) 2. the practice
of inducing sleep with drugs and then talking to the patient to
draw out buried thoughts. (HOS, p. 24)

NARRATIVE CHAIN, 1. a chain of similar experiences rather
than a similar somatic. (HCOB 23 May 69) 2. these are by
repeating story. By incident description. (HCOB 27 Jan 70)

NARRATIVE ITEM, 1. is one which will land the pc in a single
incident for which there is no chain. Flagrant example: “The
time the horse Baldy dumped me in the Potomac.” Obviously,
there was only one such incident. (HCOB 27 Jan 70) 2. a
narrative item describes only one possible incident. (HCOB 27
Mar 71)

263
NATIVE STATE

NATIVE STATE, 1. the potentiality of knowing everything. (SH
Spec 35, 6108C08) 2. the list of no games conditions is a
summary of the native state of a thetan. (HCOB 3 Sept 56)
3. the thetan is not in contact with space, energy, mass. He
doesn’t have any dimension. (PAB 64) 4. the native state thetan
is total knowingness. (Op Bull 1)

NATTER, sometimes pcs who have big overts become highly
critical of the auditor and get in a lot of snide comments about
the auditor. Such natter always indicates a real overt. (HCOB 7
Sept 64 II)

NATURAL AUDITOR, the natural auditor ties right into it and
does a workmanlike job. He or she gets lots of bulletin and tape
passes in ratio to flunks, absorbs data well and gets it into
practice, does a passable job on a pc even at the start of
training, and improves casewise rapidly under the skilled
training and auditing. (HCOB 8 Mar 62)

NATURAL TRs, spoken TRs are natural. TRs are for use in life
and in the auditing room. There is no uncomfortable robot
execution or straining of voice. (BTB 18 Aug 71R)

NCG, no case gain despite good and sufficient auditing. (HCO PL
12 May 72)

NECESSITY LEVEL, 1. that amount of urgency or commotion
necessary in the environment to extrovert the individual and
put him into motion in present time. (5501C14) 2. a sudden
heightened willingness which untaps a tremendous amount of
ability. (PAB 129) 3. the emergency factor. A sudden increase of
randomity to a sufficiency that the individual makes a momen-
tary adjustment to it. In other words, it momentarily increases
his tolerance for unexpected motion. (Abi! 36)

NEEDLE PATTERN, 1. it is a chronic and constant needle
behavior on a particular pe when the auditor is saying and doing
nothing. It’s not a needle response. It’s a needle appearance
when the auditor is saying or doing nothing. (SH Spec 224,
6212C13) 2. a pattern is a series of missed withholds culminating
in a constantly active needle. A pattern can be a big dirty needle

264
NEUROSIS

or a little dirty needle. In other words a wide dial dirty needle
or a small dial dirty needle. (SH Spec 145, 6205015)

NEEDLE REACTIONS, rise, fall, speeded rise, speeded fall,
double tick (dirty needle), theta bop or any other action. (HCOB
25 Apr 63)

NEEDLE REACTIONS ABOVE GRADE IV, a response like a
brief dirty needle on a pre-OT means “No” always. A real dirty
needle is constant and continuous. The same small jerky needle
action on a person Grade V or above means “No” or that the
question is negative. (HCOB 18 Apr 68)

NEEDLE READS, see READ.

NEGATIVE BLOWDOWN, when a TA has gone below 2.0 and a
relief of the condition occurs, the TA will blow UP to normal
range. Hence, negative blowdown, as it is the reverse of a
normal blowdown. Mentioned in BTB 7 Feb 71 II reissued 7 Aug
74, Cancellation. (LRH Def. Notes)

NEGATIVE GAIN, you can erase engrams, that’s taking away.
You get actually negative gain. By the removal of the harmful
thing you can get a positive advance. That’s called negative
gain. (ESTO 6, 7203C03 SO II)

NEGATIVE POSTULATE, the postulate not to be. It cancels past
postulates and it also cancels, in greater or lesser degree, the
entire individual. (AP&A, p. 34)

NERVOUSNESS, 1. that condition which results from having
one’s space as occupied, made untenable. (PDC 48) 2. distracted
attention. (Spr Lect 14, 5304CMO07)

NEUROSIS, 1. an emotional state containing conflicts and
emotional data inhibiting the abilities or welfare of the indi-
vidual. (DTOT, p. 58) 2. singly the effect of things, deranged
being on some subject. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21) 3. antisocial
action or anti-survival action which is compulsively undertaken
by the individual. (SH Spec 299, 6308C27) 4. he’s got some idea
of what’s happening, where he is on some things and some faint
idea what’s happening in his environment on some things. But

265
NEUROTIC

generally unknowingness overbalances the knowingness and so
you get a neurosis. (SH Spec 41, 6108C17) 5. a habit which,
worsening, flies entirely out of control. One is stopped so often
in life that he becomes an enemy of stopping and dislikes
stopping so intensely that he himself will not stop things.
Neurosis and psychosis of all classes are entirely inabilities to
start, to change or to stop. (FOT, p. 68)

NEUROTIC, 1. considered to be below 2.5. The neurotic has
thorough concern about the future to the degree that he has
many more fears about the future than he has goals in the
future. He spends much of his time pondering the past. He acts
and then wonders if he has acted correctly and is sure he has
not. Thoughts to him are as solid as mest. He is overwhelmed by
sudden counter-efforts. He is operating on a subcontrol center
which has been itself very blunted. He is ill much of the time to
a greater or lesser degree. He has colds. He brings “bad luck”
and disaster. He is Homo sapiens at his “rational worst.”
(AP&A, p. 38) 2. a neurotic is a person who has some obsession
or compulsion which overmasters his self-determinism to such a
degree that it is a social liability. (Spr Lect 9, 53803CM27)
3. identified by the preclear having mock-ups which will not
persist or which won't go away. (COHA, p. 232) 4. a person who
is mainly harmful to himself by reason of his aberrations, but
not to the point of suicide. (SOS, pp. 25-26) 5. the computation
of present time only. (Sen 0-8, p. 89)

NEW PRECLEAR, never before audited. (HCOB 5 Apr 69)

NINTH DYNAMIC, 1. “the buck.” (5203CM05A) 2. aesthetics.
(PDC 2)

NIP, you take two energy beams and you slap them together just
back of a guy’s ears. (PDC 27)

NIPPING, 1. you close down over the head of some mest body and
you go “bat” and you really shoot the horsepower to him, the
voltage, for just a split instant. (5206CM28A) 2. an overt act of
the thetan is nipping by which he harasses other thetans,
nipping mest beings which usually kills them dead much to the
thetan’s surprise. (HOM, p. 50)

266
NO-GAME CONDITIONS

NO AUDITING, while seeming to deliver auditing, actually
getting nothing done. Going through endless, useless motions,
perhaps in top form, perhaps perfectly, none of which are
calculated to advance the pe’s case one inch. (HCOB 30 Dec 62)

NO CASE GAIN, 1. persons with heavy overts on Sen make no
case progress. (HCOB 23 Nov 62) 2. no TA actions in auditing or
“little TA” (less than ten divs per session). (HCO PL 5 Apr 65)
3. no case-change despite good tries with the routine processes.
(HCO PL 5 Apr 65 II)

NO-GAIN-CASE, 1. the suppressive person is a specialist in
making others ARC break with generalized entheta that is
mostly lies. He or she is also a no-gain-case. So avid are such for
the smashing of others by covert or overt means that their case
is bogged and won’t move under routine processing. (HCO PL 5
Apr 65, Handling the Suppressive Person) 2. such a person has
withholds, he or she can’t communicate freely to as-is the block
on the track that keeps them in some yesterday. Hence, a
“no-case-gain.” (HCO PL 5 Apr 65, Handling the Suppressive
Person) 3. this case performs continual calculating covert hostile
acts damaging to others. This case puts the enturbulence. and
upset into the environment, breaks the chairs, messes up the
rugs and spoils the traffic flow with “goofs” done intentionally.
(HCO PL 5 Apr 65, Handling the Suppressive Person) 4. the
“withholdy case that ARC breaks easily,” “the blowy student”
“unstable gain student.” (HCO PL 5 Apr 65 II)

NO-GAME, preponderance of win or a preponderance of lose.
(PAB 73)

NO-GAME CONDITIONS, 1. no-game conditions are: knowing
all, not-knowing everything, serenity, namelessness, no-effect
on opponent, effect on self or team, have everything, can’t have
nothing, solutions, pan-determinism, friendship with all, under-
standing, total communication, no communication, win, lose, no
universe, no playing field, arrival, death. (FOT, p. 94) 2. a
totality of barriers and a totality of freedom alike are no-game
conditions. (PAB 84) 3. reached by a preponderance of win
(no-game) or a preponderance of lose (no-game). (Op Bull
No. 17)

267
NO HAVINGNESS

NO HAVINGNESS, 1. is defined as something that a person can’t
reach or doesn’t permit itself to be reached. (SH Spec 103,
6201C23) 2. no havingness is prevented reach; in other words,
the concept of no reach. (SH Spec 97, 6201009)

NO-INTERFERENCE AREA, (zone) from R6 Solo to OT III one
does not do anything except keep the pe winning for R6 Solo to
OT III. This is the critical band of the gradation chart. From R6
to OT III you have a closed band for other major actions. (HCOB
23 Dec 71) 2. where drugs have not been handled or only
partially have been handled, the no interference zone rule is
waived. (HCOB 31 May 74)

NOMENCLATURE, the set of terms used to describe things in a
particular subject. (Aud 73 ASHO)

NO MENTION, a no mention of well done or very well done or
anything simply means: (1) F/N did not get to examiner, (2) no
major auditing errors exist in the session. (HCOB 21 Aug 70)

NON-COMMUNICATION, a non-communication consists of
barriers. (COHA, p. 18)

NON-CYCLICAL PROCESS, a repetitive process which does not
cause the preclear to cycle on the time track. (HCOB 29 Sept 65)

NON-EXTANT ENGRAM, an “engram” sometimes didn’t exist.
A pe can be trying to run being run over by a car when he never
was. (HCOB 20 May 68)

NON-READING ITEM, one that did not read when originated or
cleared and also did not read when called. (HCOB 28 Feb 71)

NON-VOCAL LOCK SCANNING, the preclear recognizes the
phrases as he goes by them incident to incident, from early to
late, but does not tell the auditor what phrases he is contacting.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 126)

“NO OVERTS” CASE, a case that “has never committed any
overts.” Such a person might for example never seem to have
anything on F-2. (BTB 22 Oct 70R)

NO RANDOMITY, below minus randomity is no randomity of any
kind. One could be at this point for two reasons: because he is

268
NOT DOING THE AUDITING COMMAND

shuddering away from confusion or he could be at that point
because he has a tremendous tolerance for confusion and for
motionlessness. (A bil 36, p. 9)

NO RESPONSIBILITY, 1. unwillingness to make a decision or
unwillingness to make a condition of being is the highest essence
of no responsibility. (PDC 7) 2. the inability to handle force.
(PDC 28)

NORMAL, type of case. The so-called normal is used here to be at
around 2.5 to 3.0 on the tone scale. He is partially extroverted,
partially introverted. He spends considerable time with his
calculations. He evaluates slowly even when he has the data,
and then postulates without realizing too much about his
postulation. He has much in the past which he does not care to
recall. He has much in his present which gives him concern. His
future goals are rather well nullified by future fears. He is Homo
sapiens. He is in terrible condition, taken from the viewpoint of
Homo novis. He is in excellent condition from the viewpoint of
past “ologies.” (AP&A, p. 37)

NORTH TO APATHY, Slang. pcs, I discover, go from minus tone
scale up to being able to have problems or tone or solids. Any
case has some point that goes from no-effect or unreal or don't
care, up to apathy. Cases go north to apathy. (HCOB 20 Aug 56)

NO SYMPATHY, |. it’s a blackout, it’s an occlusion. “I’m not
going to feel sympathy for it” is actually the phrase that goes
with the concept. (5208CM07B) 2. he’s bound and determined
not to be sympathetic, and that’s the emotion of no sympathy.
(5208CM07B) 3. is an emotion and an action. One puts a black
curtain before himself to prevent his feeling affinity with that
which he is hurting. (Sen 8-80, p. 49)

NO TA, less than ten divisions per session (2 1/2 hours). (HCO PL
5 Apr 65, Handling the Suppressive Person) See also, TONE
ARM ACTION.

NOT BEINGNESS, is an acceptance of control by the environ-
ment and abdication even of control of self. (AP&A, p. 51)

NOT DOING THE AUDITING COMMAND, is defined as simply
not executing it, or doing something else, or executing the

269
NOTHINGNESS

auditing command indifferently and then doing something else.
(SH Spec 60, 6109C28)

NOTHINGNESS, 1. an absence of everything: no time, no space,
no energy, no thought. (5501C14) 2. an absence of quantities and
locations. (5501014)

NO-TIME MOMENTS, the only things which float on the time
track are the moments of silence when no communication
occurred. These are no-time moments and so have no time in
which they can live, and so they float forward on the time track.
(Dn 55!, p. 95)

NOT IN PRESENT TIME, a person who is talking on another
subject than that to which cause was giving his attention. He
has experienced such a scarcity of communication elsewhere,
that he is still involved with communication elsewhere. This is
what we mean by “not in present time.” (Dn 55/, p. 76)

NOT-IS-NESS, 1. trying to put out of existence by postulate or
force something which one knows, priorly, exists. One is trying
to talk against his own agreements and postulates with his new
postulates, or is trying to spray down something with the force
of other is-nesses in order to cause a cessation of the is-ness he
objects to. (PXL, p. 64) 2. not-is-ness is the effort to handle
is-ness by reducing its condition through the use of force. It is
an apparency and cannot entirely vanquish an is-ness. (PXL,
p. 154) 3. there are two different conditions of not-is-ness: one is
just vanishment. The other one is an is-ness which somebody is
trying to postulate out of existence by simply saying, “It isn’t.”
A not-is-ness, in our terminology, would be this second special-
ized case of an individual trying to vanish something without
taking responsibility for having created it. (PXL, p. 100)
4. not-is-ness is manifested as and is in itself the mechanism we
know as unreality. (PXL, p. 55)

NOT-IS STRAIGHTWIRE, this is the direct cure of not-is-ness;
and where you have a case that is running a bad not-is a process
can evidently be invalidated or not-ised when the individual is
out of session, or overnight. This is what Not-is Straightwire
curés. (PAB 155)

270
NULL SUBJECTS

NOT KNOW, 1. trying not to remember. (FOT, p. 84) 2. an actual
ability to “not know” is an ability to erase by self-command the
past without suppressing it with energy or going into any other
method. (PAB 87) 3. in its most extreme manifestation is
unconsciousness. Not-know in a lesser manifestation is death.
The most extreme manifestation is when a person cannot go
unconscious and we call that insanity. (SH Spec 15X, 6106C15)

NOT KNOWINGNESS, 1. being in present time and not in the
past or the future. (PAB 88) 2. mystery. (COHA, p. 16)

NO TONE ARM ACTION, there is no meter registry of change on
the meter control lever (tone arm). (HCO PL 5 May 65) See also
NO TA.

NOT THERE, dispersed, hiding himself, being vague, not there
most of the time. (FOT, p. 29)

NULLABLE, the condition a list must be in order to have an item
found on it. (HCOB 5 Dec 62)

NULLABLE LIST, is one where items just go out very easily and
the needle doesn’t dirty up to amount to anything. (SH Spec
220, 6211C29)

NULLIFICATION, the method of handling others wherein the
individual seeks to minimize individuals, to be more than they
and so to be able to control them. This category would rather
see a man sick than well, because sick men are less dangerous
than well men according to the “thinking” that takes place in
this band. (SOS, p. 155)

NULLING, the auditor’s action in saying items from a list to a pe
and noting the reaction of the pe by use of an E-meter. (HCOB 5
Dec 62)

NULL NEEDLE, 1. means it doesn’t get a change of pattern or a
react on the question. (SH Spec 1, 6105C07) 2. the needle
continuing to behave in an action uninfluenced by the auditing
question. (BIEM, p. 40)

NULL SUBJECTS, uncharged subjects. (HCOB 8 Oct 71 III)

271
NUTRITION

NUTRITION, support of the organism by organic and inorganic
means (food, water, air, sunlight) during all of the present life,
from conception or thereabouts to death. The nutrition of a
genetic line, or course, would pass from parents to children in
the forms of organic inheritance and gestation environment.

(SOS Gloss)

272
O

O=, denotes an item which simply has the requirement of you
reading, understanding and attesting in the space opposite the
item on the checksheet. Your initials in the space provided
indicate that you have read, understood and can apply the data
concerned. (HCO PL 13 Apr 71)

OBJECT, 1. an object could be considered to be any unit
manifestation of energy including matter. It has been found that
the duration of an object roughly approximates its solidity. (Sen
8-8008, p. 14) 2. objects consist of grouped particles. (PRO 18,
5408C20) 3. a condensed piece of energy. (PDC 46)

Object

OBJECTIVE, dictionary definition “of or having to do with a
material object as distinguished from a mental concept, idea or

273
OBJECTIVE DUB-IN

belief.” Means here and now objects in PT as opposed to
“subjective.” (HCOB 2 Nov 57RA)

OBJECTIVE DUB-IN, the manifestation of putting, unknowingly,
perceptions which do not in actual fact exist, in the environ-
ment. (HCOB 11 May 65)

OBJECTIVE ENVIRONMENT, is the environment everyone
agrees is there. (HFP Gloss)

OBJECTIVE HAVINGNESS PROCESSES, objective duplication
increase. (HCOB 29 Sept 60)

OBJECTIVE PROCESSES, 1. objective processes deal with body
motions and observing and touching objects in the auditing
room. (HCOB 30 Sept 71 V) 2. look around or physical contact
processes are obviously “objective.” Pes who have been on
drugs obviously have to be run on objective not subjective
processes. Anyone can be brought more into present time with
objective processes. (HCOB 2 Nov 57RA)

OBNOSIS, 1. the observation of the obvious; the ability to look at
the obvious. (SH Spec 48, 6411C04) 2. this is a coined (invented)
word meaning observing the obvious. There is no English or any
other language precise equivalent for it. (HCO PL 26 Jun 72)

OBSERVER, condition where the preclear cannot be anything—
cannot occupy a source point or receipt point. (COHA, p. 169)

OBSESSION, he’s just returning motion on something where he’s
had too much motion thrown at him on this subject. That’s an
obsession, and that’s all an obsession is. It’s just bouncing back
the motion which has been bounced at him. (5206CM24C)

OBSESSIVE COMMUNICATION, an outflow which is not perti-
nent to the surrounding terminals and situation. In other words,
compulsive or obsessive communication is an outflow which is
not in reality with the existing reality. (Dn 55/, p. 93)

OCA GRAPH, 1. personality graph, Oxford Capacity Analysis.
(HCOB 7 Sept 71) 2. a specially prepared graph which plots ten
traits of a pe’s personality from a personality test taken by the
pe. (BTB 5 Nov 72 IV)

274
OCA GRAPH

UNACCEPTABLE STATE

NORMAL

DESIRABLE STATE

0s

SL

oot

SZ

Ost

002

G3AM3SIY SLHDIN Tv ‘peqanH uo “7 Aq G) 1yBuAdog

Juabsn uOQuae — aul] uaxo1g Mopag ayqesisag —7 suolipuos
uonuany YW), yoapsad sapun
A aiqeidaooy

ayge pasiadsig
-puadapun | snonian passaudag a]qeisur)
dg P) 3

a es ee
a ee
es sa
a es ve
a ee
a
a va
; Tt es ee ee
ae ae ope pee a ol
ee nn ee ia
| VAL eee Se
——— oe an
SS ES RS CE GC RS CS QO ES Oh +
a CR OQ OO Se
A CC OS OG
a ss
SS
a CG OO

a a a a Se ee ee

9 3 F | > a Vv

Me wea ye Sn -

ss ro nan) IIIIIIINIID « sesopy

SISATVNY ALIOVdV9 GHOIXKO

Theme meee cece neers er ecsen ees eesoores aUPy

OCA Graph

275
OCCLUDED

OCCLUDED, memory not available for recall. Someone who is
occluded has a poor memory and poor recalls of the past.
(NSOL, p. 144)

OCCLUDED CASE, 1. is fixed, most likely, in the effort of a
heavy facsimile. The occluded case is using a service facsimile so
heavily that it is in constant restimulation, and that service
facsimile is occluded by heavy effort. The occluded case
complains of illness, ordinarily. (AP&A, p. 41) 2. your occluded
case is simply a balled-up track. (5206CM24F) 3. simply a
heavily ridged case. (5203CM04B)

OCCLUSION, 1. something hidden, an occlusion of memory is
something forgotten, i.e. not available to conscious recall. An
occluded case is one whose memory is usually largely occluded
and whose field of awareness is black or very dark. (COHA
Gloss) 2. occlusion is simply using remote viewpoints and then
having the remote viewpoints go blank. (5410CM10B) 3. loss of
viewpoint of effects. When one has lost a viewpoint with which
to perceive effects and upon which he depended for all percep-
tion of effect he is very occluded. (PAB 4)

OCCLUSION TYPE OF CIRCUIT, the circuit which drops cur-
tains across certain pieces of information or may mask “I” from
contact with the standard bank or the reactive bank. This circuit
might be worded, “For your own good I have to protect you
from yourself.” (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 206)

OCTSER, October series. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
OFF, officer. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)
OFF TECH, off technical. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

OFF THE TRACK, whenever you find a patient, returned,
outside himself and seeing himself, that patient is off the track.
(DMSMH, p. 320)

OJ, overt justification (a process name). (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

OKAY TO AUDIT, an okay to audit means two things. There are
two okays to audit. One is okay to audit as an intern. This
means one has done the checksheet to the satisfaction of the
intern supervisor. One can now audit for intern qualifications.
The other is okay to audit as an HGC auditor. This means one

276
ONENESS

has done the intern checksheet, has audited flublessly to many
program completions and is passed by the HGC C/S. (HCO PL
24 Aug 71)

OLD AGE, is nothing more than a confirmed low tone on the
physiological side. (5203CM05B)

OLD CUFFS, 1. [refers to a habit of writing on his cuffs of Ole
Doe Methuselah’s, a hero of an LRH science fiction book.] “Ole
Doc sat in the sunlight and puffed his pipe and occasionally made
intricate calculations on his gold cuff—his filing case was full of
torn cuffs containing solutions which would have rocked even his
brothers of the Universal Medical Society.” (L. Ron Hubbard,
Ole Doc Methuselah, p. 75) 2. they’re just suppositions and so
forth, theories. (6410CM10C)

OLD TIMER, see FOUNDING SCIENTOLOGIST.

OLFACTORY, 1. with olfactory perception we perceive the
minute particles of matter which register as smell. (SOS, p. 59)
2. the sense of smell is evidently activated by small particles
escaping from the object, which is thus sensed traveling through
space and meeting the nerves. (SA, p. 87)

-OLOGY, means study. (5407C19)

O-METER, in 1955 a planned new and better E-meter than had
ever been built before, under the trademarked name of physio-
galvanometer, or O-meter. (PAB 52)

ONE-FIVE (1.5 on the tone scale), 1. numerical equivalent on the
Chart of Human Evaluation for the person who is in overt
hostility. Anger is his standard state. He is capable of taking
destructive action and is characteristically trying to stop things.
(PXL Gloss) 2. total obstacle. The definition of 1.5 would be just
that, total obstacle. (2ACC-30A, 5312CM21) 3. a case of chronic
anger or one which enturbulates easily into anger. (SOS, p. 51)

ONENESS, people have had the idea that there was a main body
of theta and everybody became “one” when you got to the top of
the tone scale. Fortunately that isn’t true. But you go down tone
scale and everybody becomes one. And the oneness is mest.
There’s no individuality whatsoever in mest. (PDC 6)

277
ONE-SHOT CLEAR

ONE-SHOT CLEAR, 1. there was a great deal of discussion in the
0s concerning the fact that there ought to be some chemical
which one would load up into a syringe and the word one-shot
clear became current. But it is actually a sarcastic word. I can
absolutely assure you completely and 100 per cent that there is
no magic single button. (Cl. VIII No. 9) 2. the command “Be
three feet back of your head.” This is the one-shot clear.
(5410CM10B) 3. by one-shot clear we meant one phrase or one
action given once or repeated, which would bring into being the
Clear as described in Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental
Health, Chapter II. (Dn 55/, p. 134)

ONE-VALUED LOGIC, see LOGIC.

ONE WITH THE UNIVERSE, one of the control mechanisms
which has been used on thetans is that when they rise in
potential they are led to believe themselves one with the
universe. This is distinctly untrue. Thetans are individuals.
They do not as they rise up the scale, merge with other
individualities. (Sen 8-8008, p. 25)

ONLY ONE, 1. if an individual can discover that he is only playing
on the first dynamic and that he belongs to no other team it is
certain that this individual will lose for he has before him seven
remaining dynamics. And the first dynamic is seldom capable of
besting by itself all the remaining dynamics. In Sen we call this
condition the “only one.” Here is self-determinism in the guise of
selfish-determinism and here is an individual who will most
certainly be overwhelmed. To enjoy life one must be some part
of life. (PAB 84) 2. just above zero on the tone scale. An
individual must have no effect on self and total effect on
everything and everybody else. Now that is the category of only
one. This person can never communicate on a team basis.
(5707C25) 3. you can look at any person who is being dishonest
or who is upsetting his environment or who is getting people
into trouble all the time. You could look at that person and the
actuality is he has no reality on his fellow man. He doesn’t know
they live. That’s a very low-toned thing we call “only one.” And
when they get into that then they are able to do most anything.
All criminals are in this bracket. (ASMC 2, 5506C03) 4. the
preclear has gotten into a state, ordinarily, where he is the only

278
OPERATING THETAN

one who can grant beingness, but he has so long restrained
other people from granting life to things that he himself will no
longer grant any life to things. (COHA, p. 56)

OPENING PROCEDURE BY DUPLICATION, gets the preclear
to examine, communicate with and own two dissimilar objects.
These objects are placed several feet apart and at a level so that
the preclear can pick them up without bending over, but so he
has to walk between them. (COHA, p. 48)

OPENING PROCEDURE OF 8-C, 1. the basic theory of Opening
Procedure of 8-C is to make and break communication with the
physical universe. Once an individual discovers that he can make
and break communication with walls and objects, it will be
discovered that he can let go of various pieces of his engram
bank. (PAB 47) 2. consists of having the preclear move his body
around the room under the auditor’s direction until (a) he finds
he is in actual communication with many spots on the surface of
things in the room, (b) until he can select spots in the room and
know that he is selecting them and can communicate with them,
and (c) select spots and move to them, decide when to touch
them and when to let go. (COHA, p. 44)

OPERATING, able to act and handle things. (Aud 10 UK)

OPERATING THETAN, 1. a thetan exterior who can have but
doesn’t have to have a body in order to control or operate
thought, life, matter, energy, space and time. (SH Spec 82,
6611C29) 2. willing and knowing cause over life, thought,
matter, energy, space and time. And that would of course be
mind and that would of course be universe. (SH Spec 80,
6609C08) 3. an individual who could operate totally indepen-
dently of his body whether he had one or didn’t have one. He’s
now himself, he’s not dependent on the universe around him.
(SH Spee 66, 6509C09) 4. a Clear who has been refamiliarized
with his capabilities. (HCOB 12 Jul 65) 5. a being at cause over
matter, energy, space, time, form and life. Operating comes
from “able to operate without dependency on things” and thetan
is the Greek letter theta (0), which the Greeks used to represent
“thought” or perhaps “spirit” to which an “n” is added to make a
new noun in the modern style used to create words in engineer-
ing. (BCR, p. 10) 6. by operating thetan we mean theta clear

279
OPERATION CLEAR

plus ability to operate functionally against or with mest and
other life forms. (SCP, p. 3) 7. this state of being is attained by
drills and familiarity after the state of Clear has been obtained.
A real OT has no reactive bank, is cause over matter, energy,
space, time and thought and is completely free. (HCOB 12 Jul
65)

Operating Thetan Symbol

OPERATION CLEAR, it is CLEAR you, then CLEAR your envir-
onment, then CLEAR the country. (Cert, Vol. 5, No. 2, 1958)

OPERATIVE SHOCK, a shock to the person sufficient to blow up
a few facsimiles. (5207CM24B)

OPPOSE LIST, a list in Routine 2-12 where if the reliable item
found turned on pain, you list “Who or what would . . . (reliable
item) oppose?” If it turned on sensation, list “Who or what
would oppose . . . (the reliable item)?” (HCOB 23 Nov 62)

OPPOSITE POSTULATE, an individual who has made a postu-
late on a subject experiences “failure” when he has to make an
opposite postulate later. The opposite postulate has the effect of
a negative postulate. The opposite postulate is distinguished
from a negative postulate because it depends upon effort which
a negative postulate does not necessarily have to do. (AP&A,
p. 34)

OPPOSITE VECTOR CASE, has private goals quite the reverse
of getting better. (HCOB 24 Mar 60)

OPPOSITION TERMINAL, 1. a designation of a type of GPM
item (R6 material). (HCOB 23 Aug 65) 2. one of a pair of reliable
items of equal mass and force, the significance of which the
thetan has in opposition to his own intentions. (HCOB 13 Apr 64,

280
ORG

Sen VI Part One Glossary of Terms) 3. an item or identity the pc
has actually opposed (fought, been an enemy of) sometime in
the past (or present) is called an opposition terminal. As the
person identified himself as not it, he could experience from it
only sensation. An opposition terminal when its mental residues
{black masses) are recontacted in processing, produces only
sensation, never pain. Symbol: oppterm. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

OP PRO BY DUP, Opening Procedure by Duplication. (SH Spec
67, 6509C21)

OPPTERM, opposition terminal. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

OPTIMUM PRECLEAR, would be one who had average response
to noises and sights, who had accurate sonic and visio and who
could imagine and know that he was imagining, in color-visio
and tone-sonic. This person, understand clearly, may have
aberrations which make him climb every chimney in town, drink
every drop in every bar every night (or try it anyway), beat his
wife, drown his children and suppose himself to be a jub-jub
bird. In the psychosomatic line he may have arthritis, gall-
bladder trouble, dermatitis, migraine headaches and flat feet.
Or he may have that much more horrible aberration—pride in
being average and “adjusted.” He is still a relatively easy case
to clear. (DMSMH, p. 191)

OPTIMUM RANDOMITY, 1. from the viewpoint of the indi-
vidual, something which has in it the right amount of motion or
unexpectedness for his tolerance. (Scn AD) 2. the amount of
unexpectedness and rapidness of motion he would be comfort-
able about. (Abi 36, p. 6) 3. optimum randomity is a 50/50 ratio
between cause and effect or a 50 percent offensive and 50 per
cent defensive potential. (PAB 30)

OPTIMUM SOLUTION, the solution which brings the greatest
benefit to the greatest number of dynamics. The infinitely
perfect solution would be one which brought infinite survival on
all dynamics. (NOTL, p. 96)

O-RATING, read and listen to the data and understanding of.
(HCO PL 26 Jun 72 V) See also ZERO RATE.

ORG, organization. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

281
ORGANIC

ORGANIC, internal sensations and, by new definition, emotion.
(Abd 71)

ORGANICALLY INSANE, missing or seared portions of the
brain bringing about insanity, mainly genetic or iatrogenic and
relatively rare except in institutions. (DMSMH, p. 172)

ORGANIC PERCEPTIONS, through organic perceptions we per-
ceive the states of our own bodies, internally. (SOS, p. 59)

ORGANIC. SENSATION, that sense which tells the central
nervous system the state of the various organs of the body. (SA,
p. 104)

ORGANISM, 1. a portion of mest which has been organized and is
being controlled by theta. Organisms are alive. They are the
physical manifestation of life. Theta is said, then, to be the
“energy” of life. (It is not to be confused with physical energy,
which is the “e” of “mest.”) (Abidl 114A) 2. an organism is
composed of theta and mest and their altered form, entheta and
enmest. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 246)

ORIENTATION, determination of location in space and time and
determination of energy quantity present. This applies to past,
present, future. (Sen 8-8008 Gloss)

ORIENTATION POINT, 1. that point in relation to which others
have location. It is also that point from which the space
containing the locations is being created. (COHA, p. 54) 2. a
point of reference from which the position of other objects is
judged. People are often found still using orientation points from
childhood which may be thousands of miles from their present
time location. The goal of Scientology is that the thetan be his
own principal orientation point, and that he have the ability to
use or discard any other point of reference. (COHA Gloss)

ORIGIN, a point of no-dimension, a point has neither length,
breadth, nor depth. But it is something from which you could
view length, breadth and depth. (PDC 11)

ORIGINAL FORMULA, the original formula which led us into
Scientology was: having found the conditions, I found it was
necessary to communicate with them in order to perceive, orient

282
OTHER TECH

myself in them and with the resulting understandings find out
what my purpose really was. And so that was a formula, and it
was the original formula by which we moved in. (SH Spec 57,
6504C06)

ORIGINATION, in TR-4 all originations concern the coach, his
ideas, reactions or difficulties, none concern the auditor. By
originate is meant a statement or remark referring to the state
of the coach or fancied case. (HCOB 16 Aug 71 II)

ORIGIN “I”, a viewpoint from which one can perceive anchor
points. (PDC 13)

ORIGIN OF THE PRECLEAR, the preclear volunteers something
all on his own. The preclear is as well as he can originate a
communication. That means he can stand at cause on the
communication formula. (PAB 151)

O/R LISTING, one clears “overrun” as “gone on too long” or
“happened too often.” Then one lists smoothly, calmly to the BD
F/N item which simply appears. There is no nulling. (HCOB 19
May 71)

-OSIS, the condition of. (Abi 180)

0.T., operating thetan, highest state there is. (SH Spec 66,
6509C09)

0.T. ACTIVITIES, would be those programs conducted by OTs to
assist Scientology. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)

OTHER-DETERMINED REALITY, somebody has given him a
facsimile and has really impressed him with it and so this looks
more real to him than reality. (PRO 15, 5408CM20)

OTHER-DETERMINISM, 1. simply something else giving you
orders or directions. (83ACC-6, 5410CM08) 2. something has so
thoroughly overwhelmed the pc that he is it. (HCOB 7 May 59)

OTHER SIDE OF WITHHOLDS, type of case, the person who is
afraid to find out. (HCOB 15 Mar 62)

OTHER TECH, is defined as any tech which is not standard tech.
(FO 800)

283
OT METERS

OT METERS (future meters), an entirely different meter for an
entirely different purpose. It is for use above Clear up to OT.
(EME, p. 26)

OT-3A, procedure tested and released in 1960 for use on staff
clearing course, in the HGC, and co-audit to produce theta
clears. (HCOB 24 Jan 60) [The full rundown is contained in the
HCOB 25 Jan 1960, O7-3 Procedure, HGC Allowed Processes. }

OT TR-0, a drill to train students to be there comfortably and
confront another person. The idea is to get the student able to
be there comfortably in a position three feet in front of another
person, to be there and not do anything else but be there.
Student and coach sit facing each other with eyes closed. (HCOB
16 Aug 71 II)

OUT, things which should be there and aren’t or should be done
and aren't are said to be “out,” i.e. “Enrollment books are out.”
(HCOB 19 Jun 71 ITD)

OUT-CREATED, created against too thoroughly. (PAB 85)

OUT-ETHICS, 1. an action or situation in which an individual is
involved contrary to the ideals and best interests of his group.
An act or situation or relationship contrary to the ethics
standards, codes or ideals of the group or other members of the
group. An act of omission or commission by an individual that
could or has reduced the general effectiveness of a group or its
other members. An individual act of omission or commssion
which impedes the general well-being of a group or impedes it in
achieving its goals. (HCO PL 3 May 72) 2. a person who acts
against his own moral codes and the mores of the group violates
his integrity and is said to be out-ethics. (BTB 4 Dec 72)

OUTFLOW, 1. a person talking to somebody else, communicating
to that person. (Dn 55!/, p. 62) 2. a thetan who is being
interested is simply outflowing. Interested=outflowing. Inter-
esting=inflowing. (PXL, p. 193)

OUT LIST, a wrong list item or a wrong list. (HCOB 20 Apr 72 IT)

OUT OF, in heavily restimulated circumstances the person goes
“out of.” In such a condition people want to stop things, cease to
act, halt life, and failing this they try to run away. As soon as

284
OUT OF PLUMB

the actual by-passed charge is found and recognized as the
charge by the person, up goes affinity and reality and communi-
cation and life can be lived. (HCOB 19 Aug 63)

OUT OF ARC PROCESS, this is the command which asks for out
of affinity moments, out of reality moments and out of communi-
cation moments. (HCOB 12 Jul 64)

Out of Plumb

OUT OF PLUMB, a room has eight points at the baseboard and
ceiling, and those will sometimes go completely askew. The
eight points no longer make a box. They make a twisted space.
The room looks like that to the person. (SH Spec 195A, 6209C27)

/ AE ay Outflow (Def. 1)
28

5
OUT OF SESSION

OUT OF SESSION, 1. when the preclear controls the session he is
out of session. Therefore, it is necessary for the preclear not to
stop or alter the course of action of an auditor. The moment that
a preclear can satisfactorily, to himself, stop the auditor, that
preclear is out of session and the probability of doing him much
good while he is out of session is very remote. (HCOB 4 Oct 56)
2. there are various degrees of being out of session. The most
severe of these is the person who refuses auditing. The next
degree is sitting in the chair but refusing to answer questions.
The next degree is sitting in the chair and being uncooperative
or even choppy. (HCOB 17 Nov 60) 3. the definition of “in
session” is (a) interested in own case, (b) willing to talk to the
auditor. When either of these are violated the pc is “out of
session” and is receiving no benefit from processing. (HCOB 17
Nov 60)

OUT OF VALENCE, 1. simply and entirely the pe was not in the
body he was occupying during the incident. (SH Spec 51,
6109C07) 2. in the pictures you get of old incidents, you may be
seeing yourself “outside of yourself,” not seeing the scene as you
saw it then. This is being out of valence. (HFP, p. 92) 3. it
means the case is too heavily charged. It is very, very, very
heavily charged. So the person cannot even come to the center
of his bank, he can’t be in the middle of his bank and look at it.
He has been living for eons watching himself so that the pictures
he takes are outside. (7203C30SO) 4. if you look into suppressive
person tech you will find an SP has to be out of valence to be
SP. He does not know that he is because he is himself in a
non-self valence. He is “somebody else” and is denying that he
himself exists, which is to say denying himself as a self. (HCOB
17 Jul 71)

OUT-POINT LIST, these are the elements of illogic and insanity.
(HCOB 28 Aug 70RA)

OUT RUDIMENT, a rudiment is out if it reads and in if it does
not read. (EMD, p. 37)

OUT RUDS, are easy to spot. The person with an ARC break,
won't talk or is misemotional or antagonistic. A problem
produces fixated attention. Natter and 1.1 remarks means a
withhold. (HCOB 15 Oct 74)

286
OVER-RESTIMULATION

OUT-SCANNING, you get the energy emanating from the pre-
clear to the environment in the incident. That’s out-scanning.
(HCL 4, 5203CM04B)

OUT TECH, means that Scientology is not being applied or is not
being correctly applied. (HCOB 13 Sept 65)

OUT THE BOTTOM, Slang. the individual drops down the tone
scale so far he can go no further down. It symbolized being
worse off than merely being on the bottom of the ladder. Gone
downward from the bottom. (LRH Def. Notes)

OVER ACKNOWLEDGEMENT, 1. acknowledging before the pc
has said all. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen VI Part One Tone Arm
Action) 2. giving an unnecessary number of Goods, Thank yous,
etc., which will have the same effect as under acknowledging.
(BTB 29 Jun 62)

OVERAUDITING, auditing beyond a grade of release attained.
(Aud 10 UK)

OVERBURDEN, the incident is too charged in one place to be
confronted. (HCOB 15 Jul 70)

OVERLISTED LIST, the pc is just kind of in apathy about it all
and upset and sort of audited into the ground, and it’s all sort of
tight and the mass is tight and the needle is tight. The auditor
had a complete list and didn’t know when to stop. (SH Spec 255,
6304C04)

OVER-PERCEPTION, this is not necessarily imagination, .but it
can go to the length of seeing and hearing things which are not
there at all, which happens to be a common insanity. (DMSMH,
p. 189)

OVER-RESTIMULATION, 1. pe goes into more charge than he or
she can itsa easily. The TA slows down. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen
VI Part One Tone Arm Action) 2. something that is over-restim-
ulated is not easily discharged because in some fashion or
another the discharge has been prevented. It comes from getting
a hold of too much and not discharging it. (SH Spec 300, 6308C28)
3. there is a condition of over-restimulation. Its definition is, it will
not discharge by ordinary means. (SH Spec 300, 6308C28)

287
OVERRUN

—;—

OVERRUN, 1. an overrun means doing something too long that
has engrams connected with it which means an engram chain
with too many engrams on it being restimulated by life or
auditing. Hence overrun. If this overrun persisted unhandled
eventually the pe would be overwhelmed and one in theory,
would have a low TA. (HCOB 16 Jun 70) 2. gone on too long or
happened too often. (HCOB 3 Jun 71) 3. means the pe came out
of the bank and the pe went back into it again. (Class VIII,
No. 2) 4. continuing a process past the optimum point. (Abi! 218)
5.. running past a free, floating needle on any type of process.
(HCOB 2 Aug 65)

OVERRUNNING, means accumulating protests and upsets about
it until it is just a mass of stops. Anyone can do anything forever
unless he begins to stop it. (HCOB 2 Jun 71 I)

OVERSHOOTING, going beyond a completion or completing a
completion. (HCOB 16 Aug 70)

OVERSHOT, entered the case too high. (PAB 61)

OVERT ACT, 1. an overt act is not just injuring someone or
something; an overt act is an act of omission or commission
which does the least good for the least number of dynamics or
the most harm to the greatest number of dynamics. (HCO PL 1
Nov 70 III) 2. an intentionally committed harmful act committed
in an effort to resolve a problem. (SH Spec 44, 6410C27) 3. that
thing which you do which you aren’t willing to have happen to
you. (1SH ACC 10, 6009C14)

OVERT HOSTILITY, here is the occasional grouch, the complain-
ing individual who yet makes no mistake about what he finds
wrong. The “blunt, honest” type who tactlessly tears up the
tenderer feelings of companions is found in this band. (SOS,
p. 20)

OVERT-MOTIVATOR SEQUENCE, 1. if a fellow does an overt,
he will then believe he’s got to have a motivator or that he has
had a motivator. (AHMC 2, 6012C31) 2. the sequence wherein
someone who has committed an overt has to claim the existence
of motivators. The motivators are then likely to be used to
justify committing further overt acts. (PXL Gloss)

288
OWN

OVERT OF OMISSION, a failure to act resulting in the injury,
reduction or degradation of another or others in their beingness,
persons, possessions or dynamics. (HCOB 1 Nov 68 II)

OVERWHELMING, 1. as a person begins to be unwilling to
overwhelm, he, of course, begins to be unwilling to win and so
loses pan-determinism and sinks into self-determinism. Games
are, for our auditing purposes, “contests in overwhelmings.”
The primary overwhelming is to take space. (PAB 80) 2.
overwhelming does not consist of space, energy et al. It is the
idea that an overwhelming has occurred. The winner is con-
vinced that he has overwhelmed the opposing player. The loser
is convinced that he has been overwhelmed. (PAB 80) 3. to push
in too tight. (SH Spee 57, 6109C21)

OVERWHUMPED, Slang. over-restimulated. (SH Spec 302A,
6309C03)

O/W, overt/withhold. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

O-W BY TRANSFER, most pcs are on O-W by transfer which is
to say when they kick George in the head they get a headache
themselves. This makes them think they are George. (HCOB 22
Dec 60)

OWN, to own is not to label or cart away. To own is to be able to
see or touch or occupy. (FOT, p. 33)

289
OWNERSHIP

touch

occupy

see definition on previous page

OWNERSHIP, 1. ownership is a problem of havingness. If you
own something you can have it, if you don’t own it you can’t
have it. (2ACC-29B, 5312CM20) 2. ownership could be said to be
that area being covered and protected by the preclear. (PAB 8)

OWN VALENCE, his own concept of himself. (PAB 95)

290
PAB, Professional Auditors Bulletin (a series of technical booklet
issues.) (BTB 20 Aug 71R IT)

PACK, a pack is a collection of written materials which match a
checksheet. It is variously constituted—such as loose-leaf or a
cardboard folder or bulletins in a cover stapled together. A pack
does not necessarily include a booklet or hardcover book that
may be called for as part of a checksheet. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

Pack

PACKAGE, always consists of two RIs that are terminals and two
Ris that are oppterms. (HCOB 27 Jan 63)

291
PACKAGE RUDIMENT QUESTION

PACKAGE RUDIMENT QUESTION, four rudiments in one
question and therefore four major thoughts in one sentence. It’s
just a fast way of doing four rudiments in one sentence. (HCOB
25 May 62)

PACKED UP METER, a meter is “packed up” when the TA goes
high or too low and the needle freezes and won't read. (HCOB 23
Sept 66)

Pain

PAIN, 1. is composed of heat, cold, electrical, and the combined
effect of sharp hurting. If one stuck a fork in his arm, he would
experience pain. When one uses PAIN in connection with
clearing one means awareness of heat, cold, electrical or hurting
stemming from the reactive mind. According to experiments
done at Harvard, if one were to make a grid with heated tubes
going vertical and chilled tubes going horizontal and were to
place a small current of electricity through the lot, the device,
touched to a body, would produce the feeling of PAIN. It need
not be composed of anything very hot or cold or of any high
voltage to produce a very intense feeling of pain. Therefore
what we call PAIN is itself, heat, cold and electrical. If a pe
experiences one or more of these from his reactive mind, we say
he is experiencing PAIN. Symbol: PN. (HCOB 8 Nov 62) 2. the
sharp impulse or dull impulse of heat, cold and electrical. (SH
Spec 202A, 6210C23) 3. the sensation of pain is actually a
sensation of loss. It is a loss of beingness, loss of position and
awareness. (COHA, p. 210) 4. too much motion too fast.
(5203CMO05B) 5. pain, technically, is caused by an effort counter
to the effort of the individual as a whole. (Scn Jour 5-G) 6. pain

292
PAN-KNOWINGNESS

is the randomity produced by sudden or strong counter-efforts.
(AP&A, p. 100) 7. the sudden impact of theta and mest together
could be considered a turbulence which creates dissonance in
theta. This is registered and recorded as pain. (SOS, p. 40)
8. theta and mest coming together too hard get into a turmoil
which we call pain. (SOS, p. 5) 9. pain is a warning of
non-survival or potential death. (SA, p. 27)

PAIN ASSOCIATION, the person is made to associate his “wrong
ideas” with pain so that he “will not have these ideas,” or will be
“prevented from doing these things.” A crude current example
is to electric shock a person every time he smokes a cigarette.
After several “treatments” he is supposed to associate the pain
with the idea and so “give up smoking.” (HCOB 16 Jul 70)

PAINFUL EMOTION ENGRAM, 1. similar to other engrams. It
is caused by the shock of sudden loss such as the death of a
loved one. (DMSMH, p. 62) 2. the death, departure or denial by
an ally is a certain painful emotion engram. (DMSMH, p. 353)

PAINFUL INCIDENT, any incident which was painful; a death,
an operation, a big failure, big enough to render you unconscious
such as an accident. (HFP, p. 99)

PAN-DETERMINISM, 1. would mean a willingness to start,
change and stop on any and all dynamics. That is its primary
definition. A further definition, also a precision,definition, is: the
willingness to start, change and stop two or more forces,
whether or not opposed, and this could be interpreted as two or
more individuals, two or more groups, two or more planets, two
or more like-species, two or more universes, two or more spirits
whether or not opposed. This means that one would not
necessarily fight, he would not necessarily choose sides. (Dn 55!,
p. 100) 2. defined as determining the activities of two or more
sides in a game simultaneously. (PAB 84) 3. the ability to
regulate the considerations of two or more identities, whether
or not opposed. (COHA, p. 110) 4. full responsibility for both
sides of a game. (Sen 0-8, p. 119)

PAN-KNOWINGNESS, in his native state, a thetan knows
everything without looking, or anything, but he doesn’t know
any particulars of data. These are all invented. So what you
would really call this would be a potentiality, or pan-knowing-
ness. (PAB 64)

293
PAPER TRICK

PAPER TRICK, there are cases around that have been “audited”
for years who have never really done a process. This can be
whipped by a Comm Process done with paper and pencil. [The
comm process discussed in the reference HCOB is “From where
could you communicate to a victim?”] You locate the terminal
with an E-Meter and then you lay the instrument aside, give the
pe a sheet of paper and a pencil, and every time he answers your
auditing question, you have him or her draw the answer on the
paper. As the Comm Process exceeds language, it can be easily
checked. Even if the pe seems to be having some success but
could succeed faster you can boost it along with the “paper
trick” as this is called. (HCOB 27 Aug 59)

PARANOID, 1. a person with delusions, as of grandeur or,
especially, persecution. (HCOB 11 May 65) 2. is one on whom
everything is impinged. There isn’t really any such thing as a
paranoid. There’s such a thing as collapsed space. (PDC 26)

PARA-SCIENTOLOGY, 1. includes all of the uncertainties and
unknown territories of life which have not been completely
explored and explained. (PAB 85) 2. that large bin which
includes all greater or lesser uncertainties. Here are the
questionable things, the things of which the common normal
observer cannot be sure with a little study. Here are theories,
here are groups of data, even groups commonly accepted as
“known.” (COHA, p. 188) 3. those things which are uncertain-
ties, such as metaphysics, spirits, other worlds, space opera,
whole track, GE line, are all being put into the bin called
para-Scientology. (PAB 2)

PARTICLE, energy is subdivisible into a large motion, such as a
flow, a dispersal, or a ridge, and a small motion which is itself
commonly called a particle in nuclear physics. Agitation within
agitation is the basic formation of particles of energy, such as
electrons, protons and others. (Sen 8-80, p. 43)

PARTS OF MAN, 1. the individual man is divisible (separable)
into three parts (divisions). The first of these is the spirit, called
in Sen the Thetan. The second of these parts is the Mind. The
third of these parts is the Body. (FOT, p. 54) 2. thetan, thetan
machinery, body and the reactive-somatic mind. (8ACC 14,
5410C20)

294
PC TYPE B

PAST, on the time track, everything which is earlier than present
time. (SOS Gloss)

PASTORAL COUNSELING, Dianetics practiced in the Church of
Scientology as pastoral counseling, addresses the spirit in
relation to his own body and intended to increase well-being and
happiness. (BPL 24 Sept 73R I)

PAST POSTULATES, decisions or conclusions the preclear has
made in the past and to which he is still subjected in the
present. Past postulates are uniformly invalid since they cannot
resolve present environment. (HFP Gloss)

PATHOLOGY, THREE STAGES OF, predisposition, by which is
meant the factors which prepared the body for sickness,
precipitation, by which is meant the factors which cause the
sickness to manifest itself, and perpetuation, by which is meant
the factors which cause the sickness to continue. (DMSMH, pp.
91-92)

PATIENT, preclear. (PAB 87)

PATTY-CAKED, Slang. the auditor left off simply because the
preclear was having difficulty doing the process. (COHA, p. 113)

PC, preclear. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

PC EXAMINER, that person in a Sen Church assigned to the
duties of noting pes’ statements, TA position and indicators
after session or when pe wishes to volunteer information.
(HCO PL 4 Dec 71 V)

PCRD, Primary Correction Rundown: a corrective action. Pur-
pose: to get the person through the PRD. (HCOB 20 Jul 72 I)

PC TYPE A, has few personal problems. Even when they occur
he isn’t upset by them. Handles life easily. Is energetic
generally and able to work efficiently at things. Takes setbacks
optimistically. Feels good most of the time. (HCOB 29 Jun 64)

PC TYPE B, is deluged with personal problems. Can’t see any
way out. Gets upset easily or is just in plain apathy and is never
upset because things aren’t real anyway (like a boulder wouldn't
get upset). Has a hard time in life. Is generally tired and can’t
work very long at anything. Takes setbacks emotionally or just
collapses. Feels ill most of the time. A type B can’t be cause.
(HCOB 29 Jun 64)

295
PDH

PDH, 1. stands for pain drug hypnosis. It is known to some
psychiatrists as a means of compelling obedience. They some-
times use it on psychotics. (LRH ED 2 US and 2WW Only)
2. pain drug hypnosis—a drug is administered to a person, the
person is put into a trance and is told things. (5203CM05D)

PE, Personal Efficiency Foundation. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

PECULIAR CASES, all peculiar cases were cases that weren’t
run by standard tech. (Class VIII, No. 1)

PE FOUNDATION, a programmed drill calculated to introduce
people to Sen and to bring their cases up to a high level of
reality both on Sen and on life. (HCOB 29 Sept 59)

PERCEPTS, see PERCEPTICS, def. 2.

PERCEPTICS, 1. sense messages. (SOS, p. 9) 2. specialized data
from the standard memory or reactive banks which represent
and reproduce the sense messages of a moment in the past. The
sense messages of present time, also; (formerly the word
“percepts” was used to mean the sense messages of present
time, but usage has dropped this distinction). (SOS Gloss)

PERCEPTION, 1. perception is the process of recording data
from the physical universe and storing it as a theta facsimile.
(HFP, p. 181) 2. channels through which one can contact the
physical universe. (SA, p. 64) 3. any means of communicating
below the level of knowingness. There are more than fifty
perceptions used by the physical body, the best-known of which
are sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell. (COHA Gloss)

PERCEPTION POINT, there would be a viewpoint, which is a
perception point, which would consist of look, and smell, and
talk and hear, and all sorts of things could be thrown in under
this category, viewpoint. Ordinarily we simply mean at that
level of the scale, looking, but you can throw all the rest of the
perceptions in at that level of the scale. (PXZ, p. 257)

PERFECT COMMUNICATION, a perfect communication is one
which is duplicated perfectly at the effect point whatever
emanated from the cause point. (UPC 1, 5406CM05)

296
PERSONAL IDENTITY

PERFECT DUPLICATE, 1. a perfect duplicate is an additional
creation of the object, its energy, and space, in its own space,
in its own time, using its own energy. This violates the condition
that two objects must not occupy the same space, and causes a
vanishment of the object. (Scn 0-8, p. 31) 2. it means a copy in
its own space with its own particles in its own time. It'll
disappear if you do that. (5410CM10B)

PERFECT DUPLICATION, cause and effect in the same point in
space. (PXI, p. 114)

PERMANENT CERTIFICATE, in the case of an auditor, an
internship or formal auditing experience is required. When
actual honest evidence is presented to C&A that he has
demonstrated that he can produce flubless results his certificate
is validated with a gold seal and is a permanent certificate. With
other courses the person must demonstrate that he can apply
the materials studied by producing an actual, honest statistic in
the materials studied. He presents this evidence to C&A and
receives a validation gold seal on his certificate. (HCO PL 31
Aug 74 II)

PERMANENT RESTIMULATION, the mechanism of permanent
restimulation consists of opposing forces of comparable magni-
tude which cause a balance which does not respond to current
time and remains “timeless.” (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen VI Part One
Tone Arm Action)

PERPETUATION, by which is meant the factors which cause the
sickness to continue. (DMSMH, p. 92)

PERSISTENCE, the ability to exert continuance of effort toward
survival goals. (Sen 0-8, p. 73)

PERSISTENT F/N, unkillable F/N. It’s persistent at least for
that day. (HCOB 8 Oct 70)

PERSONAL IDENTITY, the composite of all your experience
plus an initial decision to be and occasional decisions not to be.
You do not die as an identity or a personality or an individual.
You and the mest body “separate” and the mest body gets a
funeral. (HF P, p. 76)

297
PERSONAL INTEGRITY

PERSONAL INTEGRITY, is knowing what you know. What you
know is what you know, and to have the courage to know and
say what you have observed. And that is integrity and there is
no other integrity. (B&C, p. 21)

PERSONALITY, 1. the individual, the personality, is the aware-
ness of awareness unit, and the awareness of awareness unit is
the person. (Dn 55!, p. 17) 2. a complex of inherited (mest,
organic, theta) and environmental (aberration, education, pre-
sent time environment, nutrition, etc.) factors. (SOS Gloss)

PERSONALITY ACCESSIBLE, means a person who will talk to
you about his condition without being antagonistic. (NOTL,
p. 34)

PERSONALITY GRAPH, a picture of a valence. On any human
being, he himself is not really enough there to have a personal-
ity. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21) See also OCA GRAPH.

PERSONAL MOTION, this is awareness of change of position in
space. This perception is assisted by sight, the feel of wind,
changes in body weight, and by the observation of external
environment. (SA, p. 106)

PERSONAL PRESENCE ALTITUDE, the individual who leads
or makes an impression upon others merely by his presence, by
his example and the fact of his existence, has personal presence
altitude. Ghandi had this to a very high degree. (SOS Gloss)

PERSONAL ROLLER COASTER, (From HCOB 5 Dec 68). Same
as roller coaster. (LRH Def. Notes)

PERSONNEL PROGRAMMER, a Personnel Programmer works
with individual staff members and draws up workable personnel
programmes and sees that they are fully executed. The purpose
of a Personnel Programmer is to help LRH to expertly pro-
gramme each staff member to a point of real success on their
own post, to operate well as a member of the group and attain
higher and higher levels of skill, knowledge and ability, through
full use of the technology of Dn and Sen. (HCO PL 22 Jan 72 II)

PGM, Program (FO 2192)

PHANTOM SLAM, always comes on and goes off and comes on
and goes off and a phantom slam has this characteristic; that it
never obeys the auditor. The phantom slam may turn on and
louse you up on the list as to which item is rockslamming. You

298
PHYSICAL UNIVERSE

don’t ever get a phantom slam on an uncharged list. The list has
to be “hotter than a pistol” to turn the slam on. Completely
aside from the phantom slam this type of case will never do
what you tell them. You say, “Has anything been suppressed?”
and they don’t think about suppressing something, they think
about something else. (SH Spec 225, 6212C13)

PHC, First Phoenix Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
PHD, Philadelphia Doctorate Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
PHI (6), mest. (NOTL, p. 142)

PHILOSOPHY, 1. the pursuit of knowledge. The knowledge of
the causes and laws of all things. (SPB, p. 1) 2. a love or pursuit
of wisdom or a search for the underlying causes and principles of
reality. (Ron’s Jour 68)

PHRASE, can be an enforced command thing which an individual
then takes as a superior command or even can take as his own
postulate. (PDC 7)

PHS, Philadelphia Doctorate Course Supplementary Lectures.
(HCOB 29 Sept 66)

PHYSICALLY ILL PC, he is in suppressed pain and each time he
gets a change, he puts on full stops as it started to hurt. He
won't get the same gain again and tomorrow the same process
or type of process won’t work. He stops the pain if it starts to
hurt, puts a new stop on his case. Slow gain, poor result is a
physically ill pe. (HCOB 12 Mar 69)

PHYSICAL PANN, the alarm reaction to theta that the organism
has been too heavily impinged upon mest. Physical pain is an
abrupt and sharp warning of non-survival. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 22)
2. theta and mest are many times brought together in disorderly
collision. This creates the phenomenon known as physical pain.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 4)

PHYSICAL UNIVERSE, 1. the universe of matter, energy, space
and time. It would be the universe of the planets, their rocks,
rivers, and oceans, the universe of stars and galaxies, the
universe of burning suns and time. In this universe we would
not include theta as an integral portion, although theta ob-
viously impinges upon it as life. (SOS, p. 4) 2. the physical
universe is reducible to motion of energy operating in space
through time. (Sen 0-8, p. 71)

299
PHYSICAL WELL-BEING

PHYSICAL WELL-BEING, absence of factors which predispose
him to illness. (SOS, p. 15)

PHYSIO-ANIMAL BRAIN, the physio-animal section of the
brain, contains the motor controls, the sub-brains, and the
physical nervous system in general, including the physical
aspect of the analytical section of the brain. The control of all
voluntary and involuntary muscles is contained in this section. It
commands all body fluids, blood flow, respiration, glandular
secretion, cellular construction, and the activity of various parts
of the body. (DTOT, p. 23)

PHYSIOGALVANOMETER, see O-METER.

PHYSIO-ANIMAL MIND, the physio-animal mind has specific
methods of “thinking.” These are entirely reactive; animal
experimentation—rats, dogs, etc.—is experimentation on and
with precisely this mind and little more. It is a fully conscious
mind. There is no period in the life of the organism from
conception to death when this mind is not awake, observing, and
recording perceptics. This is the mind of a dog, cat or rat and is
also the basic mind of a man so far as its operating character-
istics are concerned. (DTOT, p. 24)

PIANOLA CASE, 1. a case that was wide open, had sonic recall,
visio recall, no pain shut-offs or anything and you just said “Go
back to the earliest moment of pain or unconsciousness” and the
fellow went and you say, “Go to the beginning of the engram”
and he goes, and you run it out and it erases. Well, they'd begun
to call this the pianola case, because it plays itself. (5009CM23B)
2. in a pianola case, the file clerk works with you. The somatic
strip does what you tell it to do. (NOTL, p. 68) 3. a case that has
easy running in all perceptics. (NOTL, p. 25)

PICTURE, facsimile. (PAB 136) See FACSIMILE.

PICTURE AND MASSES REMEDY, the anaten pe—dopes off in
session—high TA. The handling of the pcs or pre-OTs that fall
under the above category, even though they were well rested
before session consists of: the case supervisor sends the pc or
pre-OT to a Dn auditor who would list: “What pictures or
masses have you touched on in life or in auditing that have been
left unflat?” The Dn auditor would get the best reading item
from the list, gets the somatic or pain, or sensation or unwanted
emotion or attitude that goes with that picture or mass, makes

300
PLEASURE

sure that it reads well, and he would follow down to basic and
erasure that item that read with the picture or the mass by
standard R3R. The list is reassessed and is exhausted as above.
(BTB 3 Oct 69R) [Note: The referenced BTB gives two addi-
tional remedies for handling the anaten pc—dopes off in session
—high TA.]

PINCH TEST, for demos you can do a “pinch test” where you
explain to the pe that to show him how the meter registers
mental mass—you will give him a pinch as part of the demo.
Then get him to think of the pinch (while he is holding the cans)
showing him the meter reaction and explaining how it registers
mental mass. (BTB 8 Jan 71R)

PINK SHEET, pink sheets are issued by a course supervisor as a
corrective measure. A student is given a pink sheet when
something earlier was missed that should have been learned.
The principle of the pink sheet is that a student is responsible
for all the material he has studied earlier. If he is unable to
apply or use any of this material then the pink sheet is issued to
remedy the situation. It gives the student a study assignment
calling for restudy and checkout of the specific materials
pertaining. It is a quick and precise remedy. (HCOB 19 Jun 71
III)

PL, policy letter. (BPL 5 Nov 72RA)

PLATEN, a card with holes in it that is put on another paper and
has in it the line plot mostly written out. (HCOB 8 Dec 64)

PLAY, 1. somebody invented the difference between work and
play. Play was seen to be something interesting and work was
seen to be something arduous and necessary. Play is almost
purposeless. Work has a purpose. Play should be calied work
without a purpose. Activity without a purpose. (POW, p. 32)
2. unreal or delusory motion about which you are not supposed
to be serious; you are not supposed to as-is it. (SH Spec 19,
6106C23)

PLEASURE, 1. the Dn definition of pleasure is that the organism
tending toward survival obtains pleasure by survival actions and
the seeking of survival goals. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 84) 2. the
perception of well being or an advance toward the ultimate goal.
(DTOT, p. 20) 3. creative and constructive effort. (DASF)

301
PLEASURE MOMENTS

PLEASURE MOMENTS, mental image pictures containing pleas-
ure sensations. They respond to R3R. One seldom addresses
them unless the preclear is fixated on some type of “pleasure” to
a point where it has become highly aberrated. (HCOB 23 Apr 69)

ure
nenenit

as °
,

Pleasure Moment

PLOTTING, the action of obtaining goals or items from the pe and
positioning them in their correct sequence on their respective
plots. (HCOB 18 Apr 64, Sen VI Part One Glossary of Terms)

PLS, Public Lecture Series (American). (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

PLUS-POINT LIST, they are the elements of logic and sanity.
(HCOB 28 Aug 70RA)

PLUS RANDOMITY, from the viewpoint of the individual,
something which has in it too much motion or unexpectedness
for his tolerance is plus randomity. (Abi 36)

P.M., pleasure moment. (Hubbard Chart of Human Evaluation)
PN, symbol for pain or electrical. (HCOB 19 Jan 67)

POINT OF VIEW, point from which he was looking, rather than
his opinions. (Dn 55/, p. 69)

302
POSTPARTUM PSYCHOSIS

POINTS, the arbitrary assignment of a credit value to a part of
study materials. “One page equals one point.” “That drill is
worth 25 points.” (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

POINTS SYSTEM, the system of assigning and counting up
points for studies and drills that give the progress of a student
and measure his speed of study. They are kept track of by the
student and course administrator and added up each week as the
student’s statistic. The statistic of the course is the combined
study points of the class. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

POLE THETA TRAP, the being is shot into the implant area put
on a post wobbled around and then ran through this implant of
goals, on a little monowheel pole trap which had the effigy of a
body on it, the being didn’t have a body and was put on a pole
trap. The pole trap has a body on it. (SH Spec 266, 6305C21)

POLITICAL DIANETICS, embraces the field of group activity

and organization to establish the optimum conditions and pro-
cesses of leadership and inter-group relations. (DMSMH, p. 152)

POOR CASE CONDITION OR INCOMPLETE, a staff member
who is in a state of chronic repair or who is not in good physical
condition or good case condition as they are defined. (HCO PL
21 Oct 73R)

POOR MEMORY, a poor memory means a curtained memory, the
memory being complete. Every perception observed in a life-
time is to be found in the banks. (KOS, p. 54)

POSITIONAL ALTITUDE, deriving from an arbitrarily assigned
position. Military officers and bureaucrats often depend heavily
upon positional altitude. (SOS Gloss)

POSITIVE POSTULATE, it’s not only that there is no negative
given attention to, but it does not assume that any negative is
possible. (ESTO 6, 7203C03 SO IT)

POSITIVE PROCESSING, this consists of addressing the theta on
the case and bringing it to view. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 281)

POST INJURY, after injury. (HCOB 12 Mar 69)

POSTOPERATIVE, after operation. (HCOB 12 Mar 69)

POSTPARTUM PSYCHOSIS, mental upset due to delivery of a
baby. (HCOB 15 Jan 70)

303
- POST PURPOSE CLEARING

POST PURPOSE CLEARING, an essential part of hatting; to get
the person’s post purpose cleared by an auditor. This requires
an auditor, an E-meter, and is done in session. Staff member
must bring hat folder to the PPC session so if there is any
confusion on purposes in it they can be cleared up from the hat
folder. (HCOB 4 Aug 71R) Abbr. PPC.

POSTULATE, x. 1. a self-created truth would be simply the
consideration generated by self. Well, we just borrow the word
which is in seldom use in the English language, we call that
postulate. And we mean by postulate, self-created truth. He
posts something. He puts something up and that’s what a
postulate is. (HPC A6-4, 5608C--) 2. a postulate is, of course,
that thing which is a directed desire or order, or inhibition, or
enforcement, on the part of the individual in the form of an idea.
(2ACC 28A, 53812CM14) 3. that self-determined thought which
starts, stops or changes past, present or future efforts. (AP&A,
p. 33) 4. is actually a prediction. (5112CM30B) —v. 1. in Sen the
word postulate means to cause a thinkingness or consideration.
It is a specially applied word and is defined as causative
thinkingness. (FOT, p. 71) 2. to conclude, decide or resolve a
problem or to set a pattern for the future or to nullify a pattern
of the past. (HFP, p. 155) 3. to generate or “thunk” a concept. A
postulate infers conditions and actions rather than just plain
thinks. It has a dynamic connotation. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)

POSTULATE PROCESSING, 1. that processing which addresses
the postulates, evaluations and conclusions of the preclear at the
level of self-determined thought, yet postulate processing has
some value when addressed to stimulus-response ideas. Postu-
late processing is the primary and highest method of processing
a thetan. With creative processing, it constitutes Scn 8-8008.
(Sen 8-8008, p. 37) 2. the process or any process which permits
an individual to change his postulates. (PDC 37)

POSTULATED REALITY, a second type of reality is postulated
reality, which is brought into being by creative or destructive
imagination. (SOS, p. 97)

POTENTIAL TROUBLE SOURCE, 1. a person or preclear who
“roller-coasters,” i.e., gets better, then worse. This occurs only
when his connection to a suppressive person or group is

304
POWER AUDITOR

unhandled and he must, in order to make his gains from Sen
permanent, receive processing intended to handle such. (ISE,
p. 48) 2. somebody who is connected with an SP who is invali-
dating him, his beingness, his processing, his life. (SH Spec 63,
6506C08) 3. means the case is going to go up and fall down. He’s
a trouble source because he’s going to get upset. He’s a trouble
source because he’s going to make trouble. And he’s trouble for
the auditor and he’s trouble for us and he’s trouble for himself.
(SH Spec 68, 6510C14) 4. it means someone connected to a
person or group opposed to Sen. It is a technical thing. It results
in illness and roller-coaster and is the cause of illness and
roller-coaster. (HCOB 17 Apr 72) Abbr. PTS.

POTENTIAL VALUE, 1. the potential value of the individual is
derived from his ability to think and his power in the following
fashion, where PV equals potential value, A equals ability to
think and D equals power. PV=ADX. (DASF) 2. equal to
intelligence multiplied by the dynamics of the individual to a
certain power. This might be restated as meaning that the
potential value of any man was equal to some numerical factor,
denoting his structural intelligence and capability, multiplied by
his free theta to a power. This was written in the handbook in
an effort to encourage some psychologist to discover what the
power of the dynamic might be and conclude some means of
establishing potential value by psychometry. (SOS, p. 126)
3. the potential value of an individual or a group may be expressed
by the equation PV=IDX where I is intelligence and D is
dynamic. The worth of an individual is computed in terms of the
alignment, on any dynamic, of his potential value with optimum
survival along that dynamic. (DMSMH, p. 40)

POWER, 1. the amount of work which can be accomplished in a
unit of time, or the amount of force which can be applied in a
unit of time. Power has the connotation of being potential. Power
does not necessarily mean application of it. (SH Spec 83,
6612C06) 2. the ability to maintain a position in space. (PAB 131)

POWER AUDITOR, a graduate of the Saint Hill Special Briefing
Course who has also served the Saint Hill Internship. Only they
are qualified to do the power processes of Grade V. They are
Class VII auditors. (JSE, p. 45)

305
POWER PROCESSES

POWER PROCESSES, the processes audited only by Class VII
auditors which make Grade V Power Releases. (Scn AD)

PPC, Post Purpose Clearing. (HCOB 4 Aug 71R)
PR, process. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

PR (PUBLIC RELATIONS), 1. Slang. to cover up, putting up a
lot of false reports to serve as a smoke screen for idleness or bad
actions. (HCO PL 4 Apr 72) 2. public relations cheery false-
hoods. (HCOB 22 Sept 71) 3. a technique of communicating
ideas. (HCO PL 13 Aug 70 I)

PRACTICAL, the drills which permit the student to associate and
coordinate theory with the actual items and objects to which the
theory applies. Practical is application of what one knows to
what one is being taught to understand, handle or control.
(HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

PRACTICAL INSTRUCTOR, assists the practical supervisor,
handles all practical administration and acts as auditing super-
visor. (HCO PL 18 Dec 64)

PRACTICAL SUPERVISOR, handles all practical instruction,
acts as auditing supervisor. (HCO PL 18 Dec 64)

PR AUDITING REPORT, meaning promoting instead of auditing.
A false auditing report. (HCOB 16 Aug 70)

PRD, Primary Rundown. (HCOB 20 Jul 72 I)

PRECIPITATION, the factors which cause the sickness to mani-
fest itself. (DMSMH, p. 92)

PRECLEAR, 1. a person who, through Scn processing, is finding
out more about himself and life. (PXZ, p. 20) 2. a spiritual being
who is now on the road to becoming Clear, hence preclear.
(HCOB 5 Apr 69) 3. one who is discovering things about himself
and who is becoming clearer. (HCO PL 21 Aug 63)

PRECLEAR ASSESSMENT SHEET, the purpose of this form is
to establish auditor control over the preclear, to better acquaint
the auditor with his preclear, and to provide essential informa-
tion required. (BTB 24 Apr 69R)

306
PREHAVINGNESS SCALE

PRECURSOR, earlier engram. (DTOT, p. 98)

PREDICTION, 1. when we speak of prediction we mean that he
should be in communication with his environment as it will exist,
as well as it exists. (Dn 55!, p. 62) 2. the process of knowing the
future. Living only for today is the process of not knowing the
future. (FOT, p. 85)

PREDISPOSITION, 1. before the fact, the guy is disposed to get
sick. (7204C07S0O ITI) 2. the factors which prepared the body for
sickness. (DMSMH, p. 92)

PREFRONTAL LOBOTOMY, uses a scalpel or ice pick to perform
an operation on the prefrontal lobes of the brain. (DMSMH,
p. 151)

PRE-HAVE, before one attained havingness he ran a “before-
havingness” process hence “pre (before) have.” When the full
scale was achieved he could have. (LRH Def. Notes)

PREHAVINGNESS BUTTONS, the things that prevent people
from having. (SH Spec 18, 6106C22)

PREHAVINGNESS SCALE, 1. an assessment scale which takes
in most possible formulas and regimens: Havingness is the
make-break point of a case. Before havingness can be tested for,
all heavy areas on the lower part of the scale must be flat. The
most elementary use of the scale is to assess the points on the
scale upwards until a fall is observed and then to run this fall
out. (HCOB 28 Jan 61) 2. any seale giving degrees of doingness
or not doingness. (HCOB 7 Nov 62 III)

Preclear

307
PREMATURE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

PREMATURE ACKNOWLEDGEMENT, occurs when you “coax”
a person to talk after he has begun with a nod or a low “yes” you
ack, make him forget, then make him believe you haven't got it
and then make him tell you at great length. He feels bad and
doesn’t cognite and may ARC break. Any habit of agreeable
noises and nods can be mistaken for acknowledgement, ends cycle
on the speaker, causes him to forget, feel dull, believe the listener
is stupid, get cross, get exhausted explaining and ARC break.
The missed withhold is inadvertent. One didn’t get a chance to
say what one was going to say because one was stopped by
premature acknowledgement. Result, missed W/H in the
speaker, with all its consequences. (HCOB 7 Apr 65)

PRENATAL ESP, another manifestation of charge and circuits. A
circuit may exist which says, “I know what you're thinking
about,” and when returned to its vicinity the preclear seems to
get the thoughts of mother and father by ESP. Actually these
“thoughts” are composites of phrases which occur in the reactive
and standard banks of the preclear. There may well be extra-
sensory perception, but “prenatal ESP” is false. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 209)

PRENATALS, a Dn term used to denote engrams received before
birth. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

PRENATAL VISIO, there actually is a prenatal visio, but it is
black. The blackness of the prenatal, when the individual is
stuck in a prenatal engram, will actually blot out his visio. There
is no mechanism save that of the imagination which is known to
produce the pictures that come about with “prenatal visio.” (SOS,
p. 209)

PRE-OT, a thetan beyond the state of Clear who, through the
advanced courses, is advancing to the full state of operating
thetan. (PRD Gloss)

PREPARED LIST, 1. prepared by the auditor, prepared by me,
prepared by somebody else. It is not given by the pc—it is made
up, listed by somebody else, not the preclear. (Class VIII, No.
11) 2. lists designed to find by-passed charge and repair a faulty
auditing action or life situation. (HCOB 28 May 70) 3. is one

308
PREPCLEARING

which is issued in an HCOB and is used to correct cases. There
are many of these. Notable amongst them is C/S 58 and its
corrections. (HCOB 15 Oct 73)

PREPCHECK, 1. sec checking=security checking, so it couldn’t
be used as a purely auditing action for the pe. So I had to have a
new word. Prep for preparatory to auditing. It’s a forerunner of
ruds. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. preparatory check. A process. (HCOB
23 Aug 65) 3. on a prepcheck run each reading item (SF, F, LF,
BD) from the assessed list of items on the prepcheck buttons.
Each button is run to F/N, Cog. Take up each reading button in
turn until you get full EP for the subject. (BTB 10 Apr 72R)

PREPCHECK BUTTONS, the following order and number of
prepcheck buttons should be used wherever an “18-button
prepcheck” is recommended. Do not use the older order of
buttons. For all uses the 18 prepcheck buttons now are:
suppressed, careful of, didn’t reveal, not-ised, suggested, mis-
take been made, protested, anxious about, decided, withdrawn
from, reached, ignored, stated, helped, altered, revealed, as-
serted, agreed (with). (HCOB 14 Aug 64)

PREPCHECKING, 1. a way of cleaning up a case in order to run
Routine 3D Criss Cross. I developed prepchecking in order to
get around an auditor’s difficulty in “varying the question” in
pulling withholds. Auditors had a hard time doing this, hence
prepchecking. Prepchecking became more important than a
“rote procedure for sec checking.” The target of a prepcheck
question is a chain of withholds. The purpose of prepchecking is
to set up a pce’s rudiments so they will stay in during further
clearing of the bank. (HCOB 1 Mar 62) 2. the reason this is
called prepchecking and the reason it isn’t called withhold
system and it isn’t called anything else but prepchecking is it’s
preparatory to clearing. (SH Spec 114, 6202C21) 3. is the system
of getting each rudiment in with a crunch, so it’s more or less
permanently in during the auditing in 3DXX and that’s prep-
checking. (SH Spec 110, 6202C13)

PREPCLEARING, 1. preparatory to clearing. Prepclearing for
short. Abandon all further reference to security checking or sec

309
PRE-RELEASE

checking. The task of the auditor in prepclearing is to prepare a
pe’s rudiments so that they can’t go out during 3D Criss Cross.
We have just risen well above security checking in ease of
auditing and in case gains. (HCOB 12 Feb 62) 2. prepchecking is
synonymous at the present moment. (SH Spec 114, 6202C21)

PRE-RELEASE, any patient who is entered into therapy to
accomplish a release from his chief difficulties, psychosomatic or
aberrational. (DMSMH Gloss)

PRESENT TIME, 1. the time which is now and which becomes
the past almost as rapidly as it is observed. It is a term loosely
applied to the environment existing in now, as in “The preclear
came up to present time,” meaning the preclear became aware -
of the existing matter, energy, space, and time of now. The
point on anyone’s time track where his physical body (if alive)
may be found. “Now.” (HCOB 11 May 65) 2. when we say that
somebody should be in present time we mean he should be in
communication with his environment. We mean, further, that he
should be in communication with his environment as it exists,
not as it existed. (Abil Mi 246) 3. a response to the continuous
rhythm of the physical universe, resulting in a hereness in
nowness. (HCOB 15 May 63) 4. the ground, sky, walls, objects,
and people of the immediate environment. In other words, the
anatomy of present time is the anatomy of the room or area in
which you are at the moment when you view it. (PAB 35) 5. a
continuing series of instants in which, moment to moment, theta
goes on changing mest. (SOS, p. 36) 6. an ever extending
moment; and a person who is free on his time track is generally
in present time, moving forward through the consecutive
moments of time. (SOS, p. 102) 7. an arbitrary time, agreed
upon, and is the same across a whole universe. It is the point of
coincidence of three universes. (PAB 29) 8. people go out of
present time because they can’t have the mest of present time,
that’s it. Present time is only the referral point that exists. In
its absence all becomes bank. (HCOB 29 Sept 60) Abbr. PT.

PRESENT TIME ENVIRONMENT, the whole area covering the
pe’s life and livingness over a definite period. It may be the last
day, the last week, the last year, depending on the pc. (HCOB
16 Oct 63)

310
PRESSOR RIDGE

PRESENT TIME PROBLEM, 1. technically, a special problem
that exists in the physical universe now, on which the pc has his
attention fixed. (HCOB 31 Mar 60) 2. is one that exists in
present time, in a real universe. It is any set of circumstances
that so engages the attention of the preclear that he feels he
should be doing something about it instead of being audited.
(HCOB 3 Jul 59) 3. a present time problem is one which has its
elements in the material universe in present time, which is
going on now, and which would demand the preclear’s attention
to such an extent that he would feel he had better be doing
something about it rather than be audited. (HCOB 16 Dec 57)
4. any worry that keeps a pe out of session, which worry must
exist in present time in the real universe. (PAB 142) Abbr.
PTP.

PRE-SESSION PROCESS, 1. a process that is used to get into
session (a) a stranger who isn’t receiving well; (b) a person
antagonistic to Sen; (c) a person who ARC breaks easily in
session; (d) a person who makes few gains in auditing; (e) a
person who relapses after being helped; (f) a person who makes
no gains in auditing; (g) a person who, having been audited,
refused further auditing; (h) any person being audited as a check-
off before session, aloud to pc or silently by auditor. (HCOB 21
Apr 60) 2. designed as classes of processes to handle these four
points: (1) help factor; (2) control factor; (3) pe communication
factor; (4) interest factor. These four are vital to auditing itself
and without them auditing doesn’t happen. (HCOB 21 Apr 60)

PRESSOR BEAM, 1. the pressor is a beam which can be put out
by a thetan which acts as a stick and with which one can thrust
oneself away or thrust things away. The pressor beam can be
lengthened, and in lengthening, pushes away. Pressor beams
are used to direct action. (Sen 8-8008, pp. 48-49) 2. a pressor
beam which is exerting pressure expands when it is energized.
(PDC 8)

PRESSOR RIDGE, that ridge formed by two or more pressor
beams operating against each other in conflict. (Sen 8-8008,
p. 49)

311
PRESSOR-TRACTOR RIDGE

PRESSOR-TRACTOR RIDGE, a combination of pressor-tractor
flows in sufficient collision as to form a solidification of energy.
(Sen 8-8008, p. 49)

PRESSURE, if one took a fork and pressed it against the arm,
that would be pressure. A bank solidity is a form of pressure.
(HCOB 19 Jan 67)

PRESSURE SOMATIC, is, in Dn, considered to be a symptom in
a lock, secondary or engram, simply part of the content. (HCOB
23 Apr 69)

PRETENDED DEATH CASE, the pretended death case has
come to a point where he considers the environment so fraught
with menace that nothing in the environment has any intent
save to kill him and that death is immediate. He has insufficient
energy or reason remaining even to appeal for help and, indeed,
he considers that there is no person or object to which he can so
appeal, and so he attempts to demonstrate to anything in the
environment that it has won and that he is already dead. (SOS,
p. 172)

PRETENDED KNOWINGNESS, is actually denial of knowing-
ness. (SH Spec 35, 6108C08)

PRETENSE, a false reason or excuse. A mere show without
reality. (HCO PL 3 May 72)

PREVENT, is to a large degree an anatomy of a problem. (SH
Spec 29, 6107C14)

PREVENTIVE DIANETICS, a large subject, infiltrating the
fields of industry and agriculture and other specialized activities
of man, its basic principle is the scientific fact that engrams can
be held to minimal content or prevented entirely with large
gains in favor of mental health and physical well-being as well as
social adjustment. (DMSMH, pp. 152-153)

PREVENTIVE SCIENTOLOGY, in this branch of processing, an
individual is freed from assuming states lower than those he has
already suffered from. In other words, the progress of tenden-
cies, neuroses, habits and deteriorating activities can be halted
by Sen or their occurrence can be prevented. This is done by

312
PRIMARY SCALE

processing the individual on standard Sen processes without
particular attention to the aberration involved. (FOT, pp. 87-88)

PRICE OF FREEDOM, constant alertness, constant willingness
to fight back. There is no other price. (AHMC-1, 6012C31)

PRIDE, pride is aesthetic sensitivity. (5208CM07D)
PRIMAL CAUSE, communication origin. (Dn 55!, p. 85)

PRIMARY CORRECTION RUNDOWN, 1. it consists of auditing
and study correction actions. The Primary Correction Rundown
takes care of people who have trouble on the Primary Rundown.
(HCOB 4 Apr 72R) 2. the rundown consists of ethics orientation
on the first dynamic, potential trouble source handling for
connections with hostile elements, drug handling, case handling,
the why of not using study tech or study, the Study Correction
List and handling, Method 7, a review of grammar, and then
back to a Primary RD. (HCOB 30 Mar 72R) Abbr. PCRD.

PRIMARY ENGRAM, one that contains physical pain and uncon-
sciousness. (NOTL, p. 46)

PRIMARY LOCK, the key-in of an engram takes place at some
future date from the time the engram was actually received.
The key-in moment contains analytical reduction from weariness
or slight illness. A situation similar to the engram, which con-
tained “unconsciousness,” came about and keyed-in the engram.
This is a primary lock. (DMSMG, p. 304)

PRIMARY MID-RUDS, suppress and invalidate. Those are the
primary mid-ruds. (SH Spec 229, 6301C10)

PRIMARY RUNDOWN, 1. the Primary Rundown consists of
word clearing and study tech. It makes a student super-literate.
(HCOB 4 Apr 72R) 2. consists of Method 1 word clearing and
Method 8 on study tapes and Student Hat. (HCOB 30 Mar 72R)
Abbr. PRD.

PRIMARY SCALE, a list of NOUNS or CONDITIONS which are
key items in mental reaction. When these are assessed one
assessed the VERB needed to complete a command from the
SECONDARY SCALE. (HCOB 23 May 61) See HCOB 23 May 61,
Prehav Scale Revised for the actual scale. (LRH Def. Notes)

313
PRIMARY UNIVERSE

PRIMARY UNIVERSE, the physical universe. (Abil 34)

PRIMARY UNMOTIVATED ACT, as any energy or space condi-
tion survives only because it has been and is being altered, the
primary unmotivated act would be changing the condition of
energy, space and objects. (COHA, p. 159)

PRIME CAUSE, prime postulate: “to be.” (DAB, Vol. II, 1951-52,
p. 229)

PRIME POSTULATE, 1. a postulate may spring from past effort
or prime thought. A prime postulate is the decision to change
from a state of not beingness to a state of beingness. (AP&A,
p. 34) 2. we call the prime postulate the basic purpose of the
individual in Dianetics: Modern Science of Mental Health, or his
goal. (SH Spec 168, 6207C10)

PRIME THOUGHT, the decision moving the original potential
being from the state of not beingness to the state of beingness.
Prime thought can occur at any moment during any lifetime,
moving the individual from the state of not beingness to the
state of beingness. A common name for this phenomenon is
necessity level. (AP&A, p. 22)

PRINCIPLE OF A-R-C, the A-R-C triangle is affinity, reality, and
communication. The basic principle here is that as one raises or
lowers any of the three, the others are raised or lowered, and
that the key entrance point to these is communication. (PXL,
p. 38)

PRIOR ASSESSMENT, 1. the person looked on drugs or alcohol
as a cure for unwanted feelings. One has to assess what was
wrong before or prior to the cure. All it requires is a special
assessment called a prior assessment. (HCOB 19 May 69, Drug
and Alcohol Cases Prior Assessing) 2. AESPs listed separately
and run R&R, prior to first drug or alcohol taken. (HCOB 31
Aug 74)

PRIOR CAUSE, it is one of the “facts” of objects that space and
energy must have been caused before the object could exist in
the mest universe. Thus any object has prior cause. (Scn 8-8008,
p. 68)

314
PROBLEMS INTENSIVES

PRIOR CONFUSION, 1. all sticks on the time track stick because
of a prior confusion. The most stuck point on the track is a
problem. The confusion occurred minutes, days, weeks before
this problem. (HCOB 9 Nov 61) 2. all somatics, circuits,
problems and difficulties including ARC breaks are all preceded
by a prior confusion. Therefore it is possible to eradicate
somatics by sec checking the area of confusion which occurred
just before the pc noticed the somatic for the first time. (HCOB
2 Nov 61)

PRIOR READS, 1. reads which occur prior to the completion of
the major thought. (EMD, p. 38) 2. any non-instantaneousness
before the end of the sentence. (SH Spec 148, 6205C24)

PRO, Professional Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
PROB, problem. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)
PROB INT, problems intensive. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

PROBLEM, 1. a problem is postulate-counter-postulate, terminal-
counter-terminal, force-counter-force. It’s one thing versus
another thing. You've got two forces or two ideas which are
interlocked of comparable magnitude and the thing stops right
there. All right, now with these two things one stuck against
the other you get a sort of a timelessness, it floats in time. (SH
Spec 82, 6111C21) 2. a problem is a postulate-counter-postulate
resulting in indecision. That is the first manifestation of prob-
lems, and the first consequence of a problem is indecision. (SH
Spec 27, 6107C11) 3. a multiple confusion. (SH Spec 26X,
6107C03) 4. an intention counter-intention that worries the
preclear. (HCOB 23 Feb 61) 5. a problem is the conflict arising
from two opposing intentions. A present time problem is one
that exists in present time, in a real universe. (HCOB 3 Jul 59)
6. something which is persisting, the as-is-ness of which cannot
be attained easily. (PRO 16, 5408CM20)

PROBLEMS INTENSIVES, 1. can key out present time problems
of long duration, chronic somatics, circuits and hidden stan-
dards. To give a problems intensive the auditor first fills in the
Preclear Assessment Form on the preclear. The auditor then
asks the preclear for all self-determined changes the preclear

315
PROBLEMS LONG DURATION

has made this life. (HCOB 9 Nov 61) 2. each change or turning
point, was preceded by a period of confusion. Find the persons
present in the confusion. Assess the persons for most reaction,
take the one with most reaction and run a processing check on
that person to get the withholds the pc had from that person.
(HCOB 17 Oct 61) [This rundown was later revised as follows.]
3. get the self-determined changes, handle each reading change in
order of largest read. Locate the prior confusion to the change by
asking the pc for it. You want the time. Predate the time of the
prior confusion by one month. Prepcheck “Since (date) has
anything been (prepcheck button)?” References are HCOB 30
July 1962, A Smooth HGC 25 Hour Intensive and HCOB 27 Sept
62, Problems Intensive Use (BTB 9 Oct 71RA III) [The above is a
very brief summary only. The full series of steps can be found in
the referenced HCOBs and BTB.]

PROBLEMS LONG DURATION, is spotted by no real change in
characteristics or OCA or general case. (LRH Def. Notes)

PROBLEMS RELEASE, expanded Grade I release. (CG&AC 75)
See GRADE I RELEASE.

PROCEDURE CCH, CCH is a very sloppy title, for Procedure
CCH is really C for control, D for duplication, C for communica-
tion, Ct for control of thought=havingness; and that is the real
name of it. First, we get the person under control, get him into
the capability of duplicating and then we move him up into
communication more or Jess on a person level. Now we take the
mind. The mind consists of mental image pictures and if
duplication is addressed to the mind we get communication. The
third zone is the control of the thetan, which brings us to the
control of thinkingness, Ct. (PAB 122)

PROCEDURE 30, the special auditing procedure of which Open-
ing Procedure by Duplication (R2-17 Creation of Human Ability)
is the first step. (PXL Gloss)

PROCESS, a set of questions asked by an auditor to help a person
find out things about himself or life. More fully, a process is a
patterned action, done by the auditor and preclear under the
auditor’s direction, which is invariable and unchanging, com-
posed of certain steps or actions calculated to release or free a

316
PROCESSING

thetan. There are many processes and these are aligned with
the levels taught to students and with grades as applied to
preclears, all of which lead the student or the preclear gradient-
ly to higher understanding and awareness. Any single process is
run only so long as it produces change and no longer. (Sen AD)

PROCESS BITING, Slang. If the TA is moving, the process is
biting and if it is not moving the process is not biting. No motion
on the tone arm dial=no action in the bank. (SH Spec 1,
6105C07)

PROCESS BY TONE ARM, theoretically when I say process by
the tone arm I mean keeping the needle somewhere in the
vicinity of set and that gives you your tone arm motion. (SH
Spec 3, 6105C19)

PROCESS COMPLETION, defined as the end phenomena of the
process. (HCOB 26 May 71)

PROCESS CYCLE, selecting a process to be run on the preclear,
running the tone arm action into it (if necessary) and running
the tone arm action out of it. (HCOB 7 Apr 64)

PROCESSED, drilled in Sen with Sen exercises. (PAB 82)

PROCESSES OF SCIENTOLOGY, methods of “unhypnotizing”
men to their own freer choice and better life. (COHA, p. 251)

PROCESS FLAT, see FLAT PROCESS.

PROCESSING, 1. called “auditing” by which the auditor (practi-
tioner) “listens and commands.” The auditor and the preclear
(patient) are together out of doors or in a quiet place where they
will not be disturbed or where they are not being subjected to
interrupting influences. The purpose of the auditor is to give the
preclear certain and exact commands which the preclear can
follow and perform. The purpose of the auditor is to increase the
ability of the preclear. The Auditor’s Code is the governing set
of rules for the general activity of auditing. (PAB 87) 2. the
principle of making an individual look at his own existence, and
improve his ability to confront what he is and where he is. (Aud
23 UK) 3. a series of methods arranged on an increasingly deep
scale of bringing the preclear to confront the no-confront sources

317
PROCESSING CHECKS

of his aberrations and leading them to a simple, powerful, effec-
tive being! (HCO PL 18 Sept 67) 4. the verbal exercising of a
patient (preclear) in exact Sen processes. (PAB 87) 5. processing
is not getting data out of the preclear; it is not assembling his life
for him as a complete, consecutive play—it is increasing his
self-determinism and his right to reason. (DAB, Vol. fI, p. 70
1951-52) 6. a procedure by which an individual recovers his
self-determinism. No procedure which does not bring about
increased self-determinism is processing. (A bil 114A)

PROCESSING CHECKS, you will see processing checks in
literature going out, so don’t let it throw you. I'm talking about
security checks. (SH Spec 91, 6112C12)

PROCESS LAG, 1. the length of time it takes the whole circuit to
clean or clear or get free and of course that length of time is how
long it takes you to run out that question and we call that a
process lag. If you are running Opening Procedure 8-C and you
have to run it on a preclear fourteen hours before he seems to be
in good shape on the thing, you have done then a process lag and
you've cleaned up a process lag. How long did it take for this
process to be effective on the preclear, fourteen hours.
(5411CM05) 2. this is the length of time it requires for the
preclear to obtain a result from a process. (PAB 43) 3. the
length of time it takes to reduce all communication lag from a
type of question or action in auditing. (PAB 43) 4. another kind
of communication lag is simply a processing lag. It’s the length
of time that it takes the process to be effective on the preclear.
(5410CM06)

PRODUCTION, an org must produce to survive. By production is
meant training auditors who can audit, auditing pcs to a good
result and making money, or in a total socialism obtaining
adequate support in ratio to production. (HCOB 21 Nov 71 I)

PRODUCT PROGRAM, is an experimental program. It remains
experimental and has not been released. (BTB 1 Nov 72)

PROFESSIONAL AUDITING, sessions given by a trained auditor
who is governed by ethical codes and technical skill, who directs
the pe’s attention to areas which when examined by the preclear

318
PROGRAM SHEET

will cause a release of sufficient charge to cause tone arm action,
thus reaching the eventual state of Clear. (HCO PL 21 Aug 63)

PROFESSIONAL SCIENTOLOGIST, one who expertly uses Sen
on any area or level of the society. (HCOB 10 Jun 60)

PROFESSIONAL STUDENTS, are defined as (1) those students
who are holding a valid, in force and in hand Class IV or above
certificate; (2) those students who are holding a valid, in force
and in hand old HCA/HPA certificate or (3) those students who
are fully paid up through HAA and actually on the course. At a
Church of Scientology SH organization, a student to receive the
professional discount would have to be either (a) on the SHSBC
or (b) holding a valid, in force and in hand SHSBC Class VI
certificate. A valid in force cert has a fully paid up membership.
(HCO PL 6 Aug 72R)

PROFILE, an APA or OCA profile was a picture of a valence or of
valences—artificial overlays. (PAB 138)

PROGRAM, 1. is defined as the sequence of actions session by
session to be undertaken on a case by the C/S in his directions
to the auditor or auditors auditing the case. (HCOB 12 Jun 70) 2.
any series of actions designed by a C/S to bring about definite
results in a pe. A program usually includes several sessions.
(HCOB 28 Aug 71) 3. the consecutive layout of what has to be
done in the next many sessions. (HCOB 14 Jun 70)

PROGRAM COMPLETION, a program is complete when the end
phenomena of the program is attained. (HCOB 26 May 71)

PROGRAM CYCLE, selecting an action to be performed, per-
forming that action and completing it. (HCOB 7 Apr 64)

PROGRAMMING, 1. the overall planning for a person of the
courses, auditing and study he should follow for the next
extended time period. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III) 2. is simply how we
are going to take the charge off the case. (SH Spec 271,
6305C30)

PROGRAM SHEET, a sheet which outlines the sequence of
actions, session by session, to be run on the pc to bring about a
definite result. (BTB 30 Nov 72R)

319
PROGRESS PROGRAM

PROGRESS PROGRAM, 1. when you are doing something to
bring a case back up to where the case ought to be on his grade
chart. (7204C07 SO I) 2. a Sen auditing program to clean
up upsets in life. (HCOB 6 Sept 71) 3. a program to eradicate
case mishandling by current life or auditing errors. (Aud 58 UK)
4. what is called a “Repair Program” on the first issue of C/S
Series HCOB is renamed a progress program. (HCOB 25 Jun
70 II)

PROLONGATION, continuously gone on with. (7204C07 SO III)

PROMPTERS, THE, in Listen Style Auditing if the auditor
believes the pc has stopped because of embarrassment or some
similar reason, the auditor has the prompters, the only things he
is allowed to use. Prompter (a) “Have you found something you
think would make me think Jess of you?” Prompter (b) “Is there
something you thought of that you think I wouldn’t under-
stand?” Prompter (c) “Have you said something you felt I didn’t
understand? If so, tell me again.” Prompter (d) “Have you found
something you haven't understood? If so, tell me about it.”
(HCOB 10 Dec 64)

Propitiation

PROPITIATION, 1. the strange manifestation of the individual
attempting to buy off the imagined danger by propitiation.
Cases which are far down on the tone scale will, when they

320
PSEUDO-CENTERS

reach 1.0, quite commonly offer the auditor presents and
attempt to do things for him. (SOS, p. 57) 2. propitiation is an
apathy effort to hold away a dangerous “source” of pain. To
nullify the possible anger of a person perhaps long since dead
but living now again in a partner, is the hope of propitiation.
(DMSMH, p. 309) 3. this conciliation is an effort to feed or
sacrifice to an all destructive force. (DMSMH, p. 307)

PRO-SURVIVAL ENGRAM, 1. an engram which seems to be in
favor of survival. (DMSMH, p. 62) 2. pro-survival engrams
containing the ally computation can be described as those which
contain personnel who defended the patient’s existence in
moments when the patient conceived that his existence was
under attack. (DMSMH, p. 244) 3. any engram which, by
content only, not by any real aids to the individual containing it,
pretended to assist survival. (DMSMH, p. 264)

PROTEST READ, an item, possibly already run, is seen to read.
The pc frowns. He is protesting and the meter is registering
protest, not the item. A protest almost never blows down the
TA. (HCOB 29 Apr 69)

PROVISIONAL, meaning “not permanent.” (HCO PL 9 May 65)

PROVISIONAL CERTIFICATE, the student graduate is given a
provisional certificate. This looks like any other certificate but is
not gold-sealed and has provisional plainly on it. Provisional
certificates expire after one year if not validated. (HCO PL 31
Aug 74 II) See also PERMANENT CERTIFICATE.

PR PR, power processes. (Class VIII No. 17)
PSEA, pain, sensation, emotion, attitude. (7203C30S0)

PSEUDO-ALLY, 1. a person about whom the preclear has a
similar computation as an ally not based directly on an engram
recording but on a similarity to an ally. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 112) 2. a
person whom the reactive mind has confused with the real ally.
(DMSMBH, p. 251)

PSEUDO-CENTERS, the personalities of people whom you've
tried to help and have failed. These are “valences.” (HFP, p. 96)

321
PSYCHE

PSYCHE, 1. a thetan, the spirit, the being himself. (SH Spec 31,
6407C29) 2. soul. (5506C03) 3. a Greek word meaning spirit.
(PAB 82)

PSYCHIATRY, the primary difference between Scn and psychi-
atry is that psychiatry is authoritarian and tells the person
what’s wrong with him, often introducing a new lie. Sen finds
out what’s wrong with the person from the person. (SH Spec
294, 6308C14)

PSYCHO, Slang. the bank has total effect upon him and he has no
effect of any kind on the bank. A psycho is actually an engram
bank in full dramatization. (SH Spec 4, 6105C26)

PSYCHO., combining form: refers to mind. (DMSMH, p. 92)

PSYCHO-ANALYSIS, is a system of mental therapy developed
by Sigmund Freud in Austria in 1894 and which depends upon
the following practices for its effects: the patient is made to
discourse (free associate) on and recall his childhood for years
while the practitioner effects a transfer of the patient’s person-
ality to his own and searches for hidden sexual incidents
believed by Freud to be the only cause of aberration; the
practitioner reads sexual significance into all discourse and
evaluates it for the patient along sexual lines; the entirety of the
cases of psycho-analysis have never been tabulated and little or
no testing has been done to establish the validity of the system.
(PAB 92)

PSYCHOLOGY, 1. defined this way: psyche-ology; spirit, study
of. (AHMC 1, 6012C31) 2. that body of practice devoted to the
creation of an effect on living forms. It is not a science since it is
not an organized body of knowledge. In actual use it is a
dramatization of Axiom 10, wholly reactive. In this wise the
word can be used by Scientologists, and this definition can be
used legally to prove Sen isn’t psychology. (HCOB 22 Jul 59)
3. the study of the spirit (or mind) that came into the peculiar
position of being a study of the spirit which denied the spirit.
(PAB 82) 4. a study of the brain and nervous system and its
reaction patterns. (ASMC 3, 5506C03) 5. an anglicized word, not
today true to its original meaning. Psychology is composited
from psyche and ology, and psyche is mind or soul, but leading

322
PSYCHOSOMATICALLY ILL CASE

psychological texts begin very, very carefully by saying that
today the word does not refer to the mind or to the soul. To
quote one, it “has to be studied by its own history,” since it no
longer refers to the soul, or even to the mind. So we don’t know
what psychology refers to today. (PXL, p. 2) 6. the study of the
human brain and stimulus-response mechanism and its code
word was “man to be happy, must adjust to his environment.”
In other words—man, to be happy must be a total effect. (2ACC
1B, 53811CM17)

PSYCHOPOLITICS, the technical name for brainwashing. (Op
Bull No. 9)

PSYCHOSIS, 1. the root word “psych” refers only to a being or
soul and the “osis” could loosely be defined as “the condition of.”
(Cert, Vol. 18, No. 2) 2. psychosis could be technically called an
inability to be; so it naturally is an inability to communicate
because beingness is a problem in anchor points and that’s a
problem in communication. (Spr Lect 9, 5303CM27) 3. an
inability to cope with the routine problems of the first and
second dynamics. (Spr Lect 9, 5303CM27) 4. psychosis is a
complete inability to assign time and space. (Sen 8-80, p. 44)
5. any major form of mental affliction or disease. (SOS, p. 25)
6. a conflict of commands which seriously reduce the individual’s
ability to solve his problems in his environment to a point where
he cannot adjust some vital phase of his environmental needs.
(DTOT, p. 58) 7. the guy is just generally the effect of
everything. (SH Spec 70, 6607C21) 8. is simply an evil purpose.
It means a definite obsessive desire to destroy. (ESTO No. 3,
7203C02 SO I)

PSYCHOSOMATIC, 1. psycho of course refers to mind and
somatic refers to body; the term psychosomatic means the mind
making the body ill or illnesses which have been created
physically within the body by derangement of the mind.
(DMSMH, p. 92) 2. a chronic pain which amounts to a physical
illness with which the pc has been afflicted for a very long time.
They turn on and they don’t turn off. (SH Spec 92, 6112C13)

PSYCHOSOMATICALLY ILL CASE, one in which the entheta
side of the engram is suppressed and the somatic side of the
engram is in restimulation. (SOS, p. 82)

323
PSYCHOSOMATIC ILLNESS

PSYCHOSOMATIC ILLNESS, 1. it is the pain contained in a past
experience or the physical malfunction of a past experience. The
facsimile of that experience gets into present time and stays
with the person until a shock drops it out of sight again or until
it is processed out. A shock or necessity however permits it to
come back. (NSOL, pp. 139-140) 2. this we call physical illness
caused by the mind. In brief, such illness is caused by percep-
tions received in the reactive mind during moments of pain and
unconsciousness. (PAB 85) 3. physiological insanity. It is being
expressed by the body rather than by the mind. (8ACC 6,
5410CM08) 4. illnesses which have a mental origin but which are
nevertheless organic. (DMSMH, p. 91)

PSYCHOTHERAPY, 1. is an effort to remove neurosis and
psychosis from man by immediate address to the individual and
the group. (LPLS 1, 5510C08) 2. a series of processes by which
the past is addressed to remedy the present or by which
physical matter, such as the human brain, is rearranged (as in a
prefrontal lobotomy) in order to inhibit odious conduct in
present time. (Sen Jour 14-G)

PSYCHOTIC, 1. does not know what is going on in his environ-
ment and does not know what is going on inside himself. It is all
unknown and therefore unobservational—unobserved. He
doesn’t know what’s happening inside himself and he doesn’t
know what’s happening with himself and he doesn’t know what’s
happening where he is and he doesn’t know what’s happening in
front of him or behind him at any given time of the day or night.
This is the one common denominator of all psychosis. (SH Spec
41, 6108C17) 2. that person who cannot receive orders of any
kind, who sits unmoving or goes berserk at the thought of doing
anything told him by another determinism. (HCOB 25 Aug 60 II)
3. the complete subject of one or more unknown causes to which
he is the unwilling effect and any effort on his part to be cause is
interfered with by the things to which he is the effect. (PAB
144) 4. when a person has lost his ability to impose time and
space upon his facsimiles and his memories he’s psychotic, he’s

gone. (5209CM04B) 5. an avoidance of both the future and
present time and a shift into the past. (PAB 17) 6. the case
which cannot observe but thinks obsessively is known to us as

324
PT ENVIRONMENT LIST

the psychotic. (PAB 8) 7. that person according to Dn definition
whose theta has become entheta completely, and who is either
entirely locked up in an engram or chain of engrams and does
nothing but dramatize them or who is under the command of a
control circuit and does some computation, if limited and
unreasonable. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 190) 8. an individual who cannot
handle himself or his environment well enough to survive and
who must be cared for to protect others from him or to protect
him from himself. (SOS, p. 25) 9. a person who is physically or
mentally harmful to those about him out of proportion to the
amount of use he is to them. (SOS, p. 26) 10. computation only
of past situations. (Sen 0-8, p. 89)

PSYCHOTIC BREAK, 1. when a person drops below the 2.0 level
he has so much entheta compared to his theta that a sudden
shock may simply enturbulate the remaining theta and send him
into a psychotic break. When all the theta is enturbulated, its
reaction is to kick apart theta and mest, in other words, cause
.death and remove the organism from the path of other organ-
isms. (SOS, p. 28) 2. some person disorients a human being one
time too many and it’s just that, disorientation. The person tells
him he’s here when he’s there and fouls him up one way or the
other and pulls the space out, or tells him he can’t stay there
anymore, or tells him that he can’t have that space, or tells him
that he can’t have that matter which also contains space. He
loses something in other words. But what he loses most
importantly is space. So he loses this space, and one day he feels
with several facsimiles a clank, and he doesn’t feel good at all.
(PDC 25) 3. a neurotic person has not given up the strain of
keeping some of his attention in present time, and will not do so
until forced by chronic, constant restimulation to do so. When
this happens the neurotic suddenly becomes psychotic. A
psychotic break has occurred. (DAB, Vol. I, No. 6, 1950)

P.T., present time. (SH Spec 72, 6607C28)

PT ENVIRONMENT LIST, 1. an Expanded Dianetics Rundown.
The auditor finds out what is charged in the pc’s present time
environment, then gets PSEAs connected with that and runs
standard R38R on the items. (7203C30S0) 2. life and livingness
environment, the workaday world of the pe is a source of
restimulation. (HCOB 1 Oct 63)

325
PTP

PTP, present time problem. (BCR, p. 21)

PTP, basically the inability to confront the dual-terminal nature of
the universe. It is an inability to span attention and denotes that
the pe who is having lots of PTPs has his attention very fixed on
something. (HCOB 31 Mar 60)

PTP OF LONG DURATION, 1. by long duration we mean this
lifetime absolute maximum limit. As soon as we exceed this
lifetime we have case. (SH Spec 42, 6108C18) 2. the attention is
fixed on something in present time all right but it’s also been
fixed on this thing for a long time and is usually subjective. (SH
Spec 42, 6108C18)

PTP OF SHORT DURATION, fixed attention on the immediate
environment. (SH Spec 42, 6108C18)

PTS, 1. means potential trouble source which itself means a
person connected to a suppressive person. All sick persons are
PTS. All pes who roller-coaster (regularly lose gains) are PTS.
Suppressive persons are themselves PTS to themselves. (HCOB
20 Apr 72) 2. is the manifestation of a postulate-counter-
postulate. (SH Spec 68, 6510C14) 3. environmental menace that
keeps something continuously keyed in. This can be a constant
recurring somatic, a continual, recurring pressure or a mass.
The menace in the environment is not imaginary in such
extreme cases. (HCOB 5 Dec 68)

PTS RD CORRECTION LIST, this correction list is assessed and
handled after a PTS Rundown has been done on the pe. It also
serves as a check list of expected actions with the Rundown. It
is always assessed M5. EP is pe no longer upset, each reading
item taken to EP. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)

PTS TYPE A, a person intimately connected with persons (such
as marital or familial ties) of known antagonism to mental or
spiritual treatment or Sen. (HCO PL 5 Apr 72 I)

PTS TYPE ONE, the SP on the case is right in present time,
actively suppressing the person. Type one is normally handled
by an ethics officer in the course of a hearing. (HCOB 24 Nov 65)

326
PV=IDx

PTS TYPE TWO, type two is harder to handle than type one, for
the apparent suppressive person in present time is only a
restimulator for the actual suppressive. The pe who isn’t sure,
won't disconnect, or still roller-coasters, or who doesn’t brighten
up, can’t name any SP at all is a type two. (HCOB 24 Nov 65)

PTS TYPE THREE, the type three PTS is mostly in institutions
or would be. On this case the type two’s apparent SP is spread
all over the world and is often more than al] the people there
are—for the person sometimes has ghosts about him or demons
and they are just more apparent SPs but imaginary as beings as
well. (HCOB 24 Nov 65)

PURE RESEARCH, study without thought of possible applica-
tion. (HCOB 30 Aug 65)

PURPOSE, the survival route chosen by an individual, a species,
or a unit of matter or energy in the accomplishment of its goal.
(NOTE: the purpose is specific and may be closely defined being
a subdivision of one of the sub-dynamics. It has been tentatively
established by investigation that an individual human being has
established his purpose for life at the age of two years and that
the actual purpose is not derived in any degree from engrams
but is only warped by them.) (DTOT Gloss)

PV=ADX, see POTENTIAL VALUE.
PV, potential value. (DMSMH, p. 40)
PV=IDx, see POTENTIAL VALUE.

327
Q

Q, 1. Q, came from guod in Q.E.D. or “therefore” in geometry. “It
follows.” (LRH Def. Notes) 2. a mathematical designation. It can
be defined this way: it is the level from which we are now
viewing which is a common denominator to all experience which
we can now view. The highest level from which we're operating.
(PDC 6)

Q AND A, 1. means “Question and Answer.” When the term Q
and A is used it means one did not get an answer to his
question. It also means not getting compliance with an order but
accepting something else. Example: Auditor, “Do birds fly?” Pe,
“I don’t like birds.” Auditor, “What don’t you like about birds?”
Flunk. It’s a Q and A. The right reply would be an answer to the
question asked and the right action would be to get the original
question answered. (HCOB 5 Dec 73) 2. the origin of the term
comes from “changing when the pe changes.” A later definition
was “Questioning the pc’s Answer.” The basic answer to a
question is, obviously, a question if one follows the duplication of
the comm formula completely. Q and A is a failure to complete a
cycle of action on a preclear. An auditor who starts a process,
just gets it going, gets a new idea because of pe cognition, takes
up the cognition and abandons the original process is Q and
Aing. (HCOB 7 Apr 64)

329
Q@ AND A’D

Q AND A’D, did what the preclear did. Any time the preclear
changed the auditor changed. (PAB 151)

QEO, the Qualifications Establishment Officer (QEO). Establishes
and maintains the Qual Division. (HCO PL 7 Mar 72)

Qs, THE, there is a series, numbering about five above the level
of logic and above the level of axiom. I have been calling these
things the Qs, just the letter “Q,” the mathematical symbol. We
call them the Qs to differentiate them from other things.
Actually Q can be defined this way: it is the level from which we
are now viewing, which is the common denominator to all
experience which we can now view. This is the level from which
we're viewing all experience and which acts as a common
denominator to all this experience and the Q is the highest level
from which we are operating. (PDC 6)

QUACK, is anyone who pretends to be something which he is not,
or one who is not able to do what he claims to do, especially if he
takes money for this pretense. (HCO Info Ltr 22 Sept 63)

QUAD, quadruple. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-1R)

QUAD DIANETICS, Quadruple Dianetics is four flow items,
Dianetic items into four flows. F-1 is flow one, something
happening to self. F-2 is flow two, doing something to another.
F-3 is flow three, others doing things to others. F-0 is flow zero,
self doing something to self. Standard R3R commands are used
on Quad Dianetics. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-1R)

QUAD FLOWS, F-1 is flow one, something happening to self. F-2
is flow two, doing something to another. F-3 is flow three,
others doing things to others. F-0 is flow zero, self doing
something to self. (HCOB 4 Apr 71-1R)

QUAL, the Qualifications Division (Division 5 of a church) where
the student is examined and where he may receive cramming or
special assistance and where he is awarded completions and
certificates and where his qualifications as attained on courses
or in auditing are made a permanent record. (HCOB 19 Jun 71
III)

330
QUICK STUDY

QUAL CONF, Qualifications Division Conference tape. (HCOB 29
Sept 66)

QUAL DIV, Qualifications Division. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

QUAL I&I, Qual Interview and Invoice. (7109C05S0)

QUAL SEC, Qualifications Secretary. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
QUESTION CLEAN, gives no instant read. (HCOB 24 Jun 62)

QUICKIE, in the dictionary you will find “Quickie also quicky:
something done or made in a hurry. Also: a hurriedly planned
and executed program (as of studies).” Anything that does not
fully satisfy all requirements is quickie. So “quickie” really
means “omitting actions for whatever reason that would satisfy
all demands or requirements and doing something less than
could be achieved.” In short a quickie is not doing all the steps
and actions that could be done to make a perfect whole. (HCOB
19 Apr 72)

QUICKIE LOWER GRADES, (also called “Triple Grades”) means
one F/N for each of three flows or three F/Ns per grade. There

QUICKIE GRADES, 1. a derogatory term denoting grades “run”
without running all the processes of the grades each to ful] end
phenomena thus reducing the effectiveness of Sen by failure to
apply it properly. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) 2. pe didn’t actually reach
full abilities in earlier Sen auditing. (HCOB 25 Jun 70 II)

QUICKIE LOWER GRADES, (also called “Triple Grades”) means
one F/N for each of three flows or three F/Ns per grade. There
are not just three F/Ns per grade. There are dozens of F/Ns.
(HCOB 30 Oct 71)

QUICKIE PROGRAMS, those which omit essential steps like vital
lists or 2wes to get data. FESes per past errors are often
omitted. (HCOB 19 Apr 72)

QUICK STUDY, a quick study by which is meant a student who
learns rapidly or a person who grasps a subject quickly, has a
high ability to confront that subject. (HCOB 2 Jun 71 I)

331
R

R, 1. routine— prefix on process designations. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
See ROUTINE for process designations like R3R, R3N, R6EW,
etc. 2. example, R2-25, “Routine” followed by the research code
number of the process. When processes are being researched
and developed they are given numbers and some become
known by these numbers rather than names. (BTB 20 Aug 71R).
3. reality. (SH Spec 304, 6309C10) 4. when an issue is cancelled,
the number is followed by R on the next issue meaning revised.
(HCO PL 2 May 72)

RABBIT, x. person who runs from everything including his bank.
(HCOB 26 Apr 71 II) —v. to run away from the bank. (HCOB 10
Apr 72)

RABBITING, frightened and running away. (HCOB 23 Dec 71)

RADIATION, is either a particle or wave-length, nobody can say
for sure. Let’s define it as a capability of influencing matter, and
that that capability can be exerted across space. (AAR, p. 68)

RANDOMITY, 1. the amount of predicted and unpredicted motion
a person has, in ratio. He likes 50/50. (PAB 30) 2. the degree of
randomity is measured by the randomness of effort vectors
within the organism, amongst organisms, amongst races or
species of organisms or between organisms and the physical
universe. (Scn 0-8, p. 79) 3. a component factor and necessary

333
RANDOM RUDIMENT

part of motion, if motion is to continue. The three degrees of
randomity consist of minus randomity, optimum randomity, and
plus randomity. (Scn 0-8, p. 79) 4. the misalignment through the
internal or external efforts by other forms of life or the material
universe of the efforts of an organism, and is imposed on the
physical organism by counter-efforts in the environment. (Sen
0-8, p. 78)

RANDOM RUDIMENT, a rudiment put into the session at any
time the pc seems to need it. Example: pe seems ARC broken so
one asks if he is and handles. Or pe is antagonistic so one asks
for a W/H. Or pe seems restless, one asks if there is a PTP. (It
is far safer to do an LIC prepared list or a C/S 53RJ as then one
can be sure which rudiment went out. (LRH Def. Notes)

RAPID TR-2, see CR0000-2.

RAPPORT, rapport is mutual feelingness. To have rapport
with something you can be it. (BTB 7 Apr 72R)

RATIONAL CONFLICT, while man is concerned with any of
the eight dynamics, any one of them may become antipathetic
to his own survival. This is rational conflict and is normally and
commonly incidental to survival. It is non-aberrative in that it is
rational within the educational limitation. (DTOT, p. 32)

RATIONALITY, 1. is ability to recognize and meet the magnitude
of effort (counter-effort) being applied to the individual. (DAB,
Vol. II, p. 100, 1951-52) 2. the computational accuracy of the
individual modified by aberration, education and viewpoint.
(DASF)

RATIONALIZATION, is wholly an attempt to shunt responsi-
bility. (AP&A, p. 58)

RATIONAL THOUGHT, optimum type of thought. This is used
by a Clear. (DTOT, p. 43)

RAVE SUCCESS STORY, one given voluntarily without coercion
or threat by the pe which expresses actual improvement and
benefit due to auditing received in complimentary terms which
may include to Scientology, the Founder, the C/S and/or the
Auditor. (HCO PL 21 Oct 73R)

334
REACTIVE CONDUCT

RAW MEAT PRECLEAR, 1. one who has never had Sen
processing. (HCOB 16 Jan 68) 2. the guy thinks he’s a brain. He
doesn’t know he’s a thetan, he isn’t up there and he thinks he’s
deteriorated into a bit of matter, he thinks he’s a body and so
forth. Hence this jocular term “raw meat.” (SH Spec 48,
6410C20)

RD, rundown. (HCOB 24 Sept 71)

REACH AND WITHDRAW, 1. reach and withdraw are the two
fundamentals in the action of theta. (COHA, p. 241) 2. to grasp
and let go. (PAB 9) [“Reach” and “Withdraw” process commands
can be found in HCOB 1 Apr 70, Ethics Program No. 1 Case
Actions. ]

REACTION TIME, it’s how fast thought can recognize a situation
and act upon it. (UPC 3)

REACTIVATED, an engram is reactivated when an individual
with an engram receives something in his environment similar
to the perceptions in the engram. The engram puts everything it
contains into greater or lesser operation. (DMSMH, /p. 73) See
RESTIMULATION.

REACTIVE, 1. irrational, reacting instead of acting. (Sen AD)
2. that means instantaneous response. (SH Spec 292, 6308C07)

REACTIVE ACTION, this is the essence of reactive action. A
thetan unwilling to or actually unable to duplicate a something-
ness tries to make nothing of everything as he counts upon the
environment to fix his attention and himself does not fix it by
choice; when he is in a very bad state a thetan then sees only
those things which have mass and are in action and neglects
those things which do not have mass and are not in action. (A bil
28)

REACTIVE BANK, 1. a stimulus-response machine of some
magnitude. (PXZ, p. 217) 2. unconscious mind. (Cert, Vol. 14,
No. 7) See REACTIVE MIND.

REACTIVE CONDUCT, when the reactive mind is able to exert
its influence upon a person far better than the thetan himself

335
REACTIVE MIND

can, we say this person is suffering from reactive conduct. He
has a reactive mind. In other words, his association has become
too blatantly in error for him any longer to conceive differences
and we get identification: A= A=A=A. (5702C28)

REACTIVE MIND, 1. a portion of a person’s mind which works
on a totally stimulus-response basis, which is not under his
volitional control, and which exerts force and the power of
command over his awareness, purposes, thoughts, body and
actions. Stored in the reactive mind are engrams, and here we
find the single source of aberrations and psychosomatic ills. (Sen
0-8, p. 11) 2. comprises an unknowing, unwanted series of
aberrated computations which bring about an effect upon the
individual and those around him. It is an obsessive strata of
unknown, unseen, uninspected data which are forcing solutions,
unknown and unsuspected, on the individual—which tells you
why it remained hidden from man for so many thousands of
years. (Sen 0-8, p. 11) 3. is basically that area of occlusion which
the pe is unable to contact and which contains within itself a
total identification of all things with all things, and until released
into the realm of knowingness continues to react upon the
person compelling him into actions, dramatizations and compu-
tations which are not optimum to his or anyone else’s survival.
(SH Spec 35, 6108C08) 4. the reactive mind is a stimulus-
response mechanism, ruggedly built, and operable in trying
circumstances. The reactive mind never stops operating.
Pictures of the environment, of a very low order, are taken by
this mind even in some states of unconsciousness. The reactive
mind acts below the level of consciousness. It is the literal
stimulus-response mind. Given a certain stimulus it gives a
certain response. (FOT, p. 58) 5. once called the “unconscious”
mind. It is a tough, rugged mind which is alert during any
moment of life, regardless of the presence of pain, and which
records everything with idiotic faithfulness. It stores up the
entheta and enmest of an accident with all the perceptics (sense
messages) present during the “unconsciousness” resulting from
the accident. (SOS, p. 9) 6. once known as the “unconscious
mind,” but this terminology is highly misleading, because the
reactive mind is the mind which is always conscious. (SOS, Bk.
2, p. 182) 7. also known as the R6 bank. (HCOB 12 Jul 65)

336
REALITY

REACTIVE PLEASURE, in the organism below 2.0 (on the tone
scale) tending toward death, a reactive pleasure is taken in the
performance of acts which lead to succumbing on any of the
dynamics. In other words, above 2.0 pleasure is survival, and
below 2.0 pleasure is obtained only by succumbing or by
bringing death to other entities, or by causing self or other
entities to be suppressed on the tone scale. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 84)

REACTIVE THOUGHT, 1. thought established by counter-efforts
as in Homo sapiens and governed entirely in a stimulus-response
basis. (Scn 8-8008, p. 36) 2. reactive thought is wholly in terms
of everything in an engram equals everything in an engram
equals all the restimulators in the environment and all things
associated with those restimulators. (DMSMH, p. 79)

READ, 1. a “tick” or a “stop” is not a read. Reads are small falls
or falls or long falls or long fall blowdown (of TA). (HCOB 27
May 70) 2. the action of the needle on the E-meter dial falling
(moving to the right). A “reading question” is one which causes
the meter needle to fall to the right to a greater or lesser extent
when the question is asked of the preclear or student with the
person holding the electrodes. In word clearing a reading word
is one which causes the meter needle to fall to the right when
said, thought or read by the student or called by the word
clearer with the student holding the electrodes. (BTB 12
Apr 72R)

READING ITEM, the read is taken when the pe first says it or
when the question is cleared. This is the valid time of read. This
reading defines what is a reading item or question. Calling it
back to see if it read is not a valid test as the surface charge may
be gone but the item or question will still run or list. (HCOB 28
Feb 71)

READING QUESTION, see READING ITEM.
READING WORD, see READ.

REALITY, 1. is, here on earth, agreement as to what is. This
does not prevent barriers or time from being formidably real. It
does not mean either that space, energy or time are illusions. It
is as one knows it is. (COHA, p. 249) 2. that sequence which

337
REALITY BREAK

begins with postulates and ends with mass, which we originally
defined as an agreed-upon thing. Reality is the agreed-upon
apparency of existence. (CMSCS, p. 11) 3. the reality of
something is the ability to place it in time and space. That’s
reality. Reality is an agreement. (5203CM05A) 4. is not what the
individual thinks reality is. Reality is what the majority agrees
it is. (SH Spec 105, 6201025) 5. the degree of agreement reached
by two ends of a communication line. In essence, it is the degree
of duplication achieved between Cause and Effect. That which is
real is real simply because it is agreed upon, and for no other
reason. (Dn 55/, p. 35) 6. reality is a postulated reality. Reality
does not have to persist to be a reality. The condition of reality
is simply is-ness. That is the total condition of reality. (PXL, p.
62) 7. the agreement upon perceptions and data in the physical
universe. (Sen 0-8, p. 83) 8. agreement in the mental plane and
solids in the physical plane. (POW, p. 92) 9. the solid objects,
the real things of life. (HCOB 21 Jun 711) 10. that which is made
and which is commonly experienced by agreement; that which is
made, or one or many make, and can be commonly experienced.
That, we will define as reality. (PDC 5) 11. is composed of the

. degree of duplication possible, and this is also describable under
the heading of agreement. Reality is a quality which depends
upon duplication and in the action of duplication expertly or
poorly done we find agreement and disagreement. (PAB 44)
12. R=Mass or agreement. (HCOB 27 Sept 68 II)

REALITY BREAK, actually disagreements on reality, usually
resulting only from a different viewpoint and not from actual
differences in reality itself. (Sen 0-8, p. 108)

REALITY SCALE, see SCALE OF REALITY.

REAL UNIVERSE, one which contains space, energy and time.
(Cert, Vol. 10, No. 12)

REASON, 1. it’s a very simple device by which a person’s ability
to estimate effort is measured. That’s his reason. (5203CM04B)
2. effort plus intention is reason. Reason has to include the
thought plus the effort. Thought plus effort is reason. (5203
CMO06A) 3. the ability to extrapolate new data from the existing
data. Reason is hand in glove with self-determinism. The
rehabilitation of a person’s self-determinism is the rehabilitation
of his ability to reason. (DAB, Vol. II, 1951-52, p. 70)

338
RECALL RELEASE

Reality

REBALANCING, letting the case settle to bring it back to a
workable state. (DMSMH, p. 294)

RECALL, 1. present time remembering something that happened
in the past. It is not re-experiencing it, re-living it or re-running
it. Recall does not mean going back to when it happened. It
simply means that you are in present time, thinking of,
remembering, putting your attention on something that hap-
pened in the past—all done from present time. (HCOB 14 Oct 68
II) 2. the process of regaining perceptions. (Sen 0-8, p. 85)
3. implies that you bring it up to present and look at it. (SH
Spec 84, 6612C13)

RECALL PROCESSES, processes which deal with the pe remem-
bering things that happened in his past. (HCOB 30 Sept 71 V)

RECALL RELEASE, expanded ARC Straightwire release.
(CG&AC 75) See ARC STRAIGHTWIRE RELEASE.

339
RECEIPT POINT

RECEIPT POINT, effect is the receipt point of the communica-
tion. (Dn 55!, p. 70)

RECESSION, 1. you may find you get into a little light engram
and you find it won’t lift and you go over it and then it faded
away. This is recession. You can do this and three days later
have a stalled case on your hands. This engram you have beaten
down comes back in full force in three days. (NOTL, p. 108)
2. during a recession the somatic of the engram first reduces
slightly and then continues constant. In the reduction, the
somatic, little by little each recounting, reduces. In a recession,
the somatic remains steady. If a recession takes place, it means
simply that an engram similar to the one which is being
re-experienced is earlier on the case, or that a tremendous
quantity of entheta in secondaries and locks exists above the
engram that is being recessed. Recessions occur only where the
auditor has not taken off enough entheta from the case in the
form of locks and secondaries to permit engrams to be run. It is
a premature address to engrams or it is caused by auditing in
violation of the file clerk’s data. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 173)

RECOUNTING, the principle of recounting is very simple. The
preclear is merely told to go back to the beginning of the
incident and to tell it all over again. He does this many times.
As he does it the engram should lift in tone on each recounting.
(DTOT, p. 103)

RECURRING WITHHOLDS, the pc that gives the same withhold
over and over to the same or different auditors, has an unknown

340
REGIMEN

incident underlying it. All is not revealed on that chain. (HCOB
21 Mar 62)

RED-HERRING, Slang. to go chasing after facsimiles. (SLP,
Iss. 7R)

RED SHEET, Repair Programs (now called Progress Programs)
are on red sheets. (HCOB 25 Jun 70)

RED TAG, a large red card placed on the outside front cover of a
pe folder which indicates that a repair session must be done
within 24 hours or if a full FES is required, within 72 hours.
(BTB 20 Jan 73RB)

REDUCE, 1. to take all the charge or pain out of an incident. This
means to have the preclear recount the incident from beginning
to end (while returned to it in reverie) over and over again,
picking up all the somatics and perceptions present just as
though the incident were happening at that moment. To reduce
means, technically, to render free of aberrative material as far
as possible to make the case progress. (DMSMH, p. 287) 2. to
render an engram free from somatic or emotion by recountings.
(NOTL Gloss)

REDUCED FACSIMILE, is a facimile which no longer has the
capability of absorbing your attention units into a mock-up of it.
(5206CM24B)

REDUCTION, a reduction is done exactly as an erasure, but the
engram will not completely erase, remaining, after a few
recountings, in a more or less static condition of low aberrative
power and with no physical pains remaining in it. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 172)

RE-EXPERIENCE, you re-experience a facsimile by seeing it,
hearing it, feeling everything in it including, especially, your
own thoughts and conclusions. Just as though you were there
again. (HFP, p. 86)

REFLEXIVE EFFECT POINT, a causative action, calculated to
result in an effect on the cause point. (NSOL, p. 23)

REGIMEN, 1. a certain settled schedule of things. (7204C07 SO
III) 2. the work horse combination of processes, that boosts the
case to clear after if has been started. (HCOB 1 Dec 60)

341
REGISTER

REGISTER, a falling needle. (EME, p. 14) See FALL.

REGRESSION, was a technique by which part of the individual’s
self remained in the present and part went back to the past.
These abilities of the mind were supposed native only in
hypnotism and were used only in hypnotic technique. (DMSMH,
p. 12)

REGRET, 1. is what inverts the time track, one wishes it hadn't
happened and so he tries to collapse the track on the point.
Actually overt acts collapse the track but the emotion of regret
is experienced at that level. (5904C08) 2. the action of trying to
make time run backwards. (5206CM24E) 3. simply an effort to
take something out of the timestream, “I’m sorry it happened. I
wish it hadn't happened.” (5112CM29A) 4. entirely the study of
reversed postulates. One intended to do something good and one
did something bad or one intended to do something bad and
accidentally did something good. Either incident would be
regretted. (PAB 91)

REHAB, rehabilitate. (HCOB 4 Jan 71)

REHABBING DRUGS, using the data from the Pe Assessment
Form, rehab in turn each drug by counting the number of times
released for each type of drug to F/N. (BTB 25 Oct 71R II) See
also CHEMICAL RELEASE.

REHABILITATION, when the person was originally released he
had become aware of something that caused the reactive mind to
de-stimulate at that point or become weak. And so he released.
You have to find that point of sudden awareness again. To
regain a former release (or thetan exterior or keyed-out OT;
released OT). (HCOB 30 Jun 65) Abbr. Rehab.

REJECTION LEVEL, the condition in which a person or object
must be, in order that the preclear be able to reject it freely.
(COHA Gloss)

RELEASE, zn. 1. one who knows he or she has had worthwhile
gains from Sen processing and who knows he or she will not now
get worse. (HCOB 9 Aug 63) 2. a person whose case “won't get
any worse.” He begins to gain by living rather than lose. (HCOB
17 Mar 59 II) 3. a person who has been able to back out of his

342
RELIABLE ITEM

bank. The bank is still there but the person isn’t sunk into it
with all its somatics and depressions. (HCOB 2 Apr 65) 4. a
release purely and simply is a person who has obtained results
in processing and has a reality on the fact that he has attained
those results. That severely is the definition of release. (SH
Spec 159, 6206C19) 5. a release is an individual from whom have
been released the current or chronic mental and _ physical
difficulties and painful emotion. (DMSMH, p. 170) 6. a series of
gradual key-outs. At any given one of those key-outs the

_ individual detaches from the remainder of his reactive bank. (SH
Spec 65, 6507027) —v. the act of taking the perceptions or effort
or effectiveness out of a heavy facsimile or taking away the
preclear’s hold on the facsimile. (HFP Gloss)

RELEASED OT, 1. if a being is a first, second or third stage
release and has also become exterior to his body in the process,
we simply add “OT” to the state of release. It is secondary in
importance to the fact of being a release. As soon as the being
seeks to exert his “OT” powers he tends to restimulate his R6
bank and so goes back into his body. (HCOB 12 Jul 65)
2. temporarily up and feeling high and great but he can fall on
his head. (SH Spec 82, 6611C29)

RELEASE OF AFFECT, 1. by first getting the patient to find
and say what shock occurred when the sickness began, getting
when, and getting it recounted, the “illness” will lessen, the
emotional state will alter—called a release of affect. (HCOB 2
Apr 69) 2. a misemotional discharge. (SH Spec 65, 6507C27)

RELIABLE ITEM, 1. Symbol: R.I. any item that rock slams well
on being found and at session end and which was the last item
still in after assessing the list. Can be a terminal, opposition
terminal, a combination terminal or a significance, provided only
that it was the item found on a list and rock slammed. (HCOB 8
Nov 62) 2. an item which the pe got after the list was nulled, and
it’s reliable and can be used to obtain further items. That is a
reliable item. (SH Spec 202A, 6210C23) 3. can be an oppterm or
a terminal and that meant one that slams when found. (SH Spec
208A, 6210C23) 4. a black mass with a significance in it which is
dominated by a goal and which is part of a GPM. (HCOB 18 Apr
64, Sen VI Part I Glossary of Terms)

343
RELIEF RELEASE

RELIEF RELEASE, expanded Grade II release. (CG&AC 75) See
GRADE II RELEASE.

RELIGION, 1. the ritual of worship or regard about spiritual
matters. (4 LACC-18, 5510C13) 2. a study of wisdom. (HCO PL 6
Mar 69) 3. the word religion itself can embrace sacred lore,
wisdom, knowingness of gods and souls and spirits, and could be
called, with very broad use of the word, a philosophy. We could
say there is religious philosophy and there is religious practice.
(PXL, p. 18)

RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY, implies study of spiritual manifesta-
tions; research on the nature of the spirit and study on the
relationship of the spirit to the body; exercises devoted to the
rehabilitation of abilities in a spirit. (HCOB 18 Apr 67)

RELIGIOUS PRACTICE, implies ritual, faith-in, doctrine based
on a catechism and a creed. (HCOB 18 Apr 67)

RELIVING, where a man is so thoroughly in the past for the
moment that while he was recalling an infant experience, if
startled he would react just as he would have when a baby.
(DMSMH, p. 197)

REM, remedy. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

REMEDY, 1. by remedy one means the correction of any
aberrated condition. (PAB 50) 2. something you do to get the pc
into condition for routine auditing. (HCOB 27 Sept 64) 3. an
auditing process which is designed to handle a non-routine
situation. (HCOB 11 Dec 64)

REMEDY A, 1. locates the misunderstoods a person has in Scn.
(HCOB 9 Nov 67) 2. has to do with definitions in Sen or the
present subject. You must not miss that, it’s present subject,
immediate subject. It’s the immediate subject the guy’s trying
to study. It’s not just applicable to Scn. This guy is trying to
study engineering and he hasn’t understood a term in engineer-
ing. Well, you could handle that with Remedy A. (SH Spec 47,
6411C17)

REMEDY B, 1. seeks out and handles a former subject, conceived
to be similar to the immediate subject, in order to clear up

misunderstandings in the immediate subject or condition.
(HCOB 12 Nov 64) 2. Remedy B is former subject. He’s got the |

344
REPAIR

present immediate subject mixed up with some former subject.
So now you've got to find the former subject and find the word
in it which hasn’t been defined. (SH Spec 47, 6411017)

REMEDY OF HAVINGNESS, 1. remedy of havingness does not
mean stuffing the preclear with energy. It means remedying his
ability to have or not have energy. (Dn 55%, p. 117) 2. by
“remedy” one means the correction of any aberrated condition.
By “havingness” one means mass or objects. It means the
remedy of a preclear’s native ability to acquire things at will and
reject them at will. (PAB 50) 3. means remedy of the condition
of having to have. (9ACC-1, 5412CM06)

REMEDY OF LAUGHTER (R2-26), in the Remedy of Laughter
the preclear can be made simply to stand up and start laughing.
The goal of the process is to regain the ability. to laugh without
reason. This process is done until the preclear can actually enjoy
a laugh without any reason whatsoever, without believing that
laughing without reason is insane, without feeling self-conscious
about laughing, and without needing any boost from the auditor.
(COHA, pp. 68-70)

REMEMBERING, 1. one could recall the fact that one had seen a
dog chase a cat. That would be remembering. (HFP, p. 26)
2. the process of knowing the past; predicting of knowing the
future. (PAB 86)

REMIMEO, Churches which receive this must mimeograph it
again and distribute it to staff. (HCOB 4 Sept 71 III)

REMOTE VIEWPOINT, 1. a viewpoint without the consideration
by the thetan that he is located at that point. The thetan may
have any number of remote viewpoints. (COHA Gloss) 2. a
technical term meaning a thetan who is afraid to look from
where he is. He puts out viewpoints over there and looks from
that. (5410CM10B)

REPAIR, 1. patching up past auditing or recent life errors. This is
done by prepared lists or completing the chain or correcting lists
or even two-way comm or prepchecks on auditors, sessions, etc.
(HCOB 23 Aug 71) 2. repair is undertaken to eradicate errors
made in auditing or the environment which impede the use of
major processes. (HCOB 12 Jun 70)

345
REPAIR OF HAVINGNESS

REPAIR OF HAVINGNESS, we used to call repair of havingness
“giving him some havingness.” (PAB 72)

REPAIR PROGRAM, 1. takes the case from where it has falsely
gotten to on the class chart and gets off the overwhelm with
light processes. (HCOB 14 Jun 70) 2. program to eradicate case
mishandling by current life or auditing errors (called a set-up
program). (HCOB 12 Jun 70) 3. progress program. (HCOB 30
Jun 70R)

REPEATER TECHNIQUE, 1. the repetition of a word or phrase
in order to produce movement on the time track into an entheta
area containing that word or phrase. Repeating or “rolling” a
phrase in an engram in order to de-intensify the phrase or
reduce the engram is not repeater technique. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 68)
2. after he has placed the patient in reverie, if he discovers the
patient, for instance, insists he “can’t go anyplace,” the auditor
makes him repeat the phrase. Repetition of such a phrase, over
and over, sucks the patient back down the track and into contact
with an engram which contains it. It may happen that this
engram will not release—having too many before it—but it will
not release only in case it has that same phrase in an earlier
engram. So the repeater technique is continued with the auditor
making the patient go earlier and earlier for it. If all goes on
schedule the patient will very often let out a chuckle or a laugh
of relief. The phrase has been sprung. (DMSMH, p. 215) 3. the
file clerk is asked for data on certain subjects, particularly those
affecting the return and travel on the time track, and which aid
the ability of the preclear to contact engrams. (DMSMH, p. 225)

REPETITIVE AUDITING CYCLE, is a specialized activity.
There’s the auditing cycle of one cycle. Then there’s the auditing
cycle of the next cycle etc. You must complete all comm cycles of
an auditing cycle. (SH Spec 290, 6307C25)

REPETITIVE COMMAND AUDITING, using TRs 0 to 4, at
Level I is done completely muzzled. This could be called muzzled
repetitive auditing style but will be called “muzzled style” for
the sake of brevity. At Level I we don’t expect the auditor to do
anything but state the command (or ask the question) with no
variation, acknowledge the pc’s answer and handle the pc

346
REPRESENT LIST

origins by understanding and acknowledging what the pe said.
(HCOB 6 Nov 64)

REPETITIVE PREPCHECKING, prepchecking by repetitive
command. This type of prepchecking is more easily done and
more thorough than prepchecking by the withhold system and
its earlier forefather security checking. (HCOB 3 Jul 62)

REPETITIVE PROCESS, 1. is simply a process that is run over
and over with the same question of the pc. The pe answers the
thing and the auditor gives him an acknowledgment. Gives him
TR-4 on his origins and it is run until it is flat. (SH Spec 169,
6207C10) 2. process which permits the individual to examine his
mind and environment and out of it select the un-importances
and importances. (SH Spec 67, 6509C21)

REPETITIVE RUDIMENTS, (1) run the rudiment as a repetitive
process until pe has no answer; (2) consult meter for a hidden
answer; (3) if meter reads use it to steer (“that” “that” each time
the meter flicks) the pe to the answer; (4) lay aside the meter
and do (1) and (2) and (3). The process is flat when there is no
instant read to the question. (HCOB 2 Jul 62)

REPETITIVE STRAIGHTWIRE, straightwire to one incident
done over and over until the incident is de-sensitized. (AP&A,
p. 22)

REPLAY, a bad habit some preclears have of playing over what
they remember they said the last time instead of progressing
through the engram freshly on each recounting and contacting
what is contained in the engram itself. (DMSMH, p. 279)

REPRESENT LIST, 1. in Routine 2-12 a list from the line
question “Who or what does . . . represent to you?” (HCOB 23
Nov 62) 2. search and discovery as a process is done exactly by
the general rules of listing. One lists for persons or groups who
are or have suppressed the pc. The list is complete when only
one item reads on nulling and this is the item. If the item turns
out to be a group, one does a second list of “Who or what would
represent (item)?” gets the list long enough to leave on nulling
only one item reading, and that is the SP. (HCOB 24 Nov 65)

347
REPRESSIONS

REPRESSIONS, 1. things pe must prevent himself from doing.
(BTB 24 Apr 69R) 2. a command that the organism must not do
something. (DTOT, p. 58)

REPUTATIONAL WITHHOLD, he must withhold it because it
will damage his beingness, in other words his reputation. (SH
Spec 63, 6110C05)

RESERVATION, is entering into an outgoing flow an impetus to
make it flow less hard and hit less hard. (HCL-5, 52083CM05A)

RESISTIVE CASE, 1. symptoms of a resistive case are thick
review folder, roller-coasters, complains, blows courses or
churches, long sessions, hard to get F/Ns, doesn’t want audit-
ing, makes trouble for auditors, and/or does not respond to
auditing. (HCOB 8 Sept 71) 2. TA in normal range but not
responding well to auditing. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)

RESISTIVE CASE RUNDOWN, the resistive case rundown is an
VIII development to handle those who cannot make the grades.
It was put into the Green Form as GF 40 so as to preserve it.
(HCOB 30 Jun 70R)

RESISTIVE V, severely occluded case. (PAB 15) See also BLACK
V.

RESISTOR, is a device placed along an electrical line to limit the
flow of current to a known value. It is used here to find the
actual values of TA positions 2 and 3, which may be different
from those given in the manufacturer’s markings. (EMD, p. 16A)

RESPON, responsibility. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

RESPONSIBILITY, 1. the ability and willingness to assume the
status of full source and cause for all efforts and counter-efforts
on all dynamics. (AP&A, p. 57) 2. when one speaks of responsi-
bility he means “the determination of the cause which produced
the effect.” (AP&A, p. 62) 3. full responsibility is not fault; it is
recognition of being cause. (AP&A, p. 58) 4. willingness to make
or unmake barriers. (PAB 30) 5. the feeling that one can operate
something. (PAB 31) 6. the area or sphere of influence the
individual can rationally affect around other people, life, mest
and the general environment. (SOS, p. 142) 7. admission of

348
RESTIMULATOR

control of space, energy and objects. (PDC 4) 8. it is willingness
to own or act or use or be. (PDC 56) 9. the concept of being able
to care for, to reach or to be. (HCO PL 17 Jan 62) 10. “admit
causing,” “able to withhold.” (HCOB 21 Jan 60, Responsibility)

RESPONSIBILITY (A PROCESS), 1. has three commands. “You
look around here and find something you could be responsible
for.” “You look around here and find something you don’t have
to be responsible for.” “You look around here and find some-
thing you would permit somebody else to be responsible for.”
(SCP, p. 22) 2. “What part of that incident could you be
responsible for?” (SMC-5, 6001C02)

RESPONSIBILITY RD, see R/S HANDLING.

RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDITION CASES, is meant the person
who insists a book or some auditor is “wholly responsible for the
terrible condition I am in.” (HCO PL 27 Oct 64)

RESTIMULATION, 1. the reactivation of a past counter-effort by
appearance in the organism's environment of a similarity toward
the content of the past randomity area. (Scn 0-8, p. 85) 2. means
the reactivation of an existing incident. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)
3. where the environment reactivates a facsimile, which then
acts back against the body or awareness of awareness unit of the
person. This is a very simple system of stimulus-response. (Dn
55!, p. 15) 4. where the perceptics of the engram are approxi-
mated by those of the present time environment. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 118)

RESTIMULATION LOCK, merely brings to the person percep-
tions which approximate those of an engram. If the individual is
tired or weary, these perceptions, sights, sounds, smells, or
whatever they may be, will restimulate the engram which has
similar perceptics; and the incident becomes a lock on the
engram and charges it to some small degree. (SOS, p. 113)

RESTIMULATOR, 1. restimulators are those approximations in
the environment of an individual of the content of an engram.
(DTOT, p. 42) 2. an approximation of the reactive mind’s
content or some part thereof continually perceived in the
environment of the organism. (DTOT, p. 27) 3. the individual

349
RESTIMULATOR LAG

with an engram receives something in his environment similar
to the perceptions in the engram. (DMSMH, p. 73) 4. words,
voice tones, music, whatever they are—things which are filed in
the reactive mind bank as parts of engrams. (DMSMH, p. 74)

RESTIMULATOR LAG, when a keyed-in engram was restimu-
lated it often required two or three days for action to take place.
(Example: say a migraine headache has as its restimulator a
rhythmic burping sound; that sound is heard by the individual
who has the engram; three days later he suddenly has a
migraine.) (DMSMH, p. 380)

REST POINT, an individual in a high-games condition is in
motion. The game gets too high, and he drops out. So he goes
into a no-games condition. You can call this a rest point on the
track. (PAB 98)

RESULTS, defined: case achieves a reality on change of case,
somatic behavior or appearance, for the better. (HCOB 28
Feb 59)

RETRACTOR, it is possible for a wave to act as a retractor. That
is to say, it is possible for certain waves to pull back instead of
push out. Thetans can put out such a retractor wave. (HOM,
p. 54)

RETRACTOR BEAM, a retractor beam or a retractor loop is a
beam which goes out here from the source, hits the target then
drags the target in. It’s to grab hold of something and hold it
and pull it in. That’s one of its uses and the other use is to nail
you into a body. (5207CM24A)

RETRAIN, is the entire course as any green student would take it
from beginning to end. (ESTO 4, 72038C02 SO II)

RETRAINING, occurs where the student has continually flubbed
sessions or tech actions or flunked exams. It is assumed he does
not have a grasp of the data. In retraining the student may be
ordered to redo the full requirements of the checksheets. (HCO
PL 22 Jul 70 III)

RETREAD, 1. means picking up the materials that the auditor is
weak on. It’s a review course. But it does mean going through

300
REVERIE

the pack and the materials of the particular level being
retreaded. It’s mostly a check of misunderstood words, Method
4 style word clearing, on the different sections of the materials
of the course, emphasis being placed on what the auditor is
weak on. (HCO PL 22 Feb 72) 2. retreading is different than
retraining. Retread is brushing up one’s study and knowledge
and application of tech on the course one is redoing. It is a
commendable action on one’s own determinism. (HCO PL 22 Jul
70 II)

RETURN, regression in its simplest form, hereafter called return
is employed in Dn auditing. Return is the method of retaining
the body and the awareness of the subject in present time while
he is told to go back to a certain incident. (DTOT, p. 87)

RETURNING, 1. the word used to go back and re-experience an
incident. (HCOB 14 Oct 68 II) 2. the technique in which the
preclear is sent as early as possible on his track before therapy
itself is engaged upon. (DMSMH, p. 225) 3. the person can
“send” a portion of his mind to a past period on either a mental
or combined mental and physical basis and can re-experience
incidents which have taken place in his past in the same fashion
and with the same sensations as before. (DMSMH, p. 11)

RETURN PROGRAM, 1. Advance Program. (HCOB 30 Jun 70R)
2. consists simply of writing down in sequence every needful
step and process missed on the class chart by the case which are
now to be done. (HCOB 14 Jun 70) 3. the return to the false
point on the Classification and Gradation Chart reached by
getting honestly done all the points missed on the road. (HCOB
14 Jun 70)

REV!, “This preclear is in trouble, please do a review hard.”
(HCOB 23 Aug 65)

REVELATION, means disclosure—a veil has been lifted—some-
thing previously hidden is now revealed. (B&C, p. 22)

REVERIE, 1. in reverie the preclear is placed in a light state of
“concentration” which is not to be confused with hypnosis. The
mind of the preclear will be found to be to some degree

351
REVERSAL OF POSTULATE

detachable from his surroundings and directed interiorly.
(DTOT, p. 135) 2. Dn reverie leaves a preclear fully aware of
everything which is taking place and with full recall of every-
thing which has happened. (DMSMH, p. 165)

REVERSAL OF POSTULATE, one intends to do something by
making a postulate that it will take place, yet something else
takes place. This is a reversal of postulate. (PAB 91)

REVERSE CURVE, THE, is the emotional curve rising from
below 2.0 to above 2.0. It happens in a short space of time. It is
important because it locates allies. (AP&A, p. 24)

REV FL?, “Could you please find out if this process is flat for
me?” (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

REVIEW, 1. the Department of Review is in the Qualifications
Division. The entire purpose of the Department of Review is
repair and correction of auditing and training difficulties.
Review is an extension of my own case cracker hat and my own
fast instruction hat. (HCO PL 24 Apr 65) 2. that area where
standard tech is corrected back to standard tech. (Class VIII
No. 2)

REVIEW CODE, the code has four symbols, REV!, REV FL?,
DECLARE?, ETH? REV! means “This pc is in trouble! Please do
a review hard.” REV FL? means “Could you please find out if
this process if flat for me?” DECLARE? means “Pc has reached
a grade or release. Please look at pc and if okay, pass on to
Certs and Awards.” ETH? means “This pe may be an ethics
case, roller-coasters or no case gain.” (HCO PL 4 Jul 65)

REVIV, revivification. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

REVIVIFICATION, the hypnotic subject could be sent back to a
moment “entirely” so that he gave every appearance of being
the age to which he was returned with only the apparent
faculties and recollections he had at that moment: this was
called “revivification” (re-living). (DMSMH, p. 12) Abbr. reviv.

REVIVIFY, relive. (HCOB 11 May 65) Abbr. reviv.

352
RIGHT

R-FACTOR, 1. R or reality; reality factor. (HCOB 21 Dec 61)
2. telling the pe what you are going to do at each new step.
(HCOB 23 Jun 62)

RHYTHM, actually a part of the time sense, but is also the ability
to tell the spaces between sound waves which are pulsing
regularly, as in the beating of a drum. (SA, p. 85)

RHYTHMIC, KINESTHETIC, weight and motion. (Abi 149)
RI, reliable item. (HCOB 4 Aug 63)

RIDGE, 1. it’s a standing apparent motionlessness of some kind or
other, an apparent solidity, an apparent no-outflow—no-inflow,
that’s a ridge. Flows have direction. Ridges have location.
(5904C08) 2. a ridge is caused by two energy flows coinciding
and causing an enturbulence of energy, which, on examination,
is found to take on a characteristic which in energy flows is very
like matter, having its particles in chaotic mixture. (Sen 8-80,
p. 43) 3. a ridge is formed from two flows and these two flows
hitting will pile things up. (PDC 18) 4. a ridge is essentially
suspended energy in space. it comes about by flows, dispersals
or ridges impinging against one another with a sufficient solidity
to cause an enduring state of energy. (Scn 8-8008, p. 18) 5. a
solid body of energy caused by various flows and dispersals
which has a duration longer than the duration of flow. Any piece
of matter could be considered to be a ridge in its last stage.
Ridges, however, exist in suspension around a person and are
the foundation upon which facsimiles are built. (Sen 8-8008,
p. 49) 6. facsimiles, or pictures, of motion. (Scn 8-80, p. 45)
7. areas of dense waves. (Sen 8-8008, p. 78) 8. electronic
densities. (Sen Jour 6-G)

RIDICULE, 1. it’s somebody grabbing hold of one of your anchor
points, claiming it and holding it away from you. (5811CM17A)
2. pushing the anchor points in and then pulling them out and
holding them out. (Spr Lect 17, 5304M08)

RIGHT, this would be forwarding a purpose not destructive to the
majority of the dynamics. (Abil Ma 229)

353
RIGHT-HAND BUTTONS

RIGHT-HAND BUTTONS, mistake, suggest, decide, protest,
these all make things read. They don’t keep things from
reading, right-hand side. (SH Spec 229, 6801C10)

RIGHTNESS, is conceived to be survival. Any action which
assists survival along the maximal number of dynamics is
considered to be a right action. Theoretically, how right can one
be? Immortal! (Sen 8-8008, p. 58)

RIGHT THOUGHT, a thought which would promote the optimum
survival of the optimum number of dynamics. (5410CM20)

RIGIDITY, fixation in space. (2ACC-26A, 5312CM17)

RISE, is exactly opposite to a “fall’—the needle moves to your
left instead of to the right. (BIEM, p. 42)

Rise

RISING NEEDLE, 1. means “no confront.” The preclear has
struck an area or something he isn’t confronting. One never calls
his attention to this. But one knows what it is. It is a steady
constant movement of the needle, rather slow, from right to
left. (EME, p. 16) 2. a rising needle tells you that the pe can’t
confront, therefore has exceedingly low reality, responsibility,
and knowingness on whatever significance it’s rising on. (HCOB
12 Jun 61)

RISING SCALE PROCESSING, 1. in this process, an individual
was asked to get one of the lower postulates on the Chart of
Attitudes and then carry it “upward” until he could get the

354
ROCKET READ

higher idea. In this particular case one would ask the preclear to
get the idea of losing and would then ask him to change that as
nearly as he could to the idea of winning. (PAB 91) 2. is another
way of doing postulate processing. One takes any point or
column of the Chart of Attitudes which the preclear can reach,
and asks the preclear then to shift his postulate upwards toward
a higher level. Rising-Scale processing is simply a method of
shifting postulates upward toward optimum from where the
preclear believes he is on the chart. It is essentially a process
directed toward increasing belief in self by using all the
“buttons” on the Chart of Attitudes. (Scn 8-8008, p. 84)

ROBOT, 1. the individual with an evil purpose has to withhold
himself because he may do destructive things. When he fails to
withhold himself he commits overt acts on his fellows or other
dynamics and occasionally loses control and does so. This of
course makes him quite inactive. To overcome this he refuses
any responsibility for his own actions. Any motion he makes
must be on the responsibility of others. He operates then only
when given orders. Thus he must have orders to operate.
Therefore one could term such a person a robot and the malady
could be called robotism. (HCOB 10 May 72) 2. a robot is a
machine that somebody else runs. (5611015)

ROCK, THE, 1. was something which we audited for and assessed
out, meaning a shape of something which we could then run a
process on. We at that time were running on the theory that it
was the first object the fellow had made on the track. (SH Spec
83, 6612C06) 2. that which a person has used to reach people or
things with and is determined in value by its creativeness or
destructiveness. It is simply a reach and withdraw mechanism
which makes a ridge and this causes the stick of the needle. The
rock is an object not a significance. (HCOB 29 Jul 58)

ROCKET READ, 1. an RR is characterized by a _ spurted,
accelerated beginning, which gives it its name. It looks like
something taking off, like being shot; shot away from its start.
It’s a spurting beginning, and then its other characteristic is a
curled end. (SH Spec 266, 6805C21) 2. it takes off. It always
goes to the right. It takes off with a very fast spurt and does a
rapid decay. Like a bullet fired into water. It’s very fast. It

355
ROCK SLAM

looks like its got all of its motive power from its first instance of
impulse with no additional motive power being imparted to it by
anything. It’s kicked off and it has no further kick so it rapidly
dies out. (SH Spec 224, 6212C13) 3. is the read of the goal or the
rock itself. (HCOB 6 Dec 62) 4. called a rocket read because it
takes off like a rocket and slows down. (SH Spec 202A, 6210C23)

ROCK SLAM, Symbol: R/S. 1. called a rock slam because it is a
needle manifestation which is achieved when the auditor is
approaching what we once called “the rock.” There’s something
earlier than the rock and that’s a goal. It’s a great deal of
random needle motion occurring solely because of the current
being set up amongst the items and identities a person has
assumed in the progress of executing his or her goals. It could
be called a goals slam which we will not call it. It’s a thetan
convulsing, and in the absence of a slamming needle you will
very often find a convulsing body. A rock slam is a crisscross of
currents which is throwing a thetan around. (SH Spec 190,
6209C18) 2. an R/S or rock slam is defined as a crazy irregular
slashing motion of the needle. It can be as narrow as one inch or
more than a full dial in width, but it’s crazy! It slams back and
forth. It is actually quite startling to see one. It is very different
from other meter phenomena. (HCOB 1 Nov 74) 3. that needle
agitation which erratically covers more than three quarters of
an inch on the E-meter dial. A rock slam is the response of an
E-meter to the conflict between terminals and opposition ter-
minals. It indicates a fight, an effort to individuate, an extreme
games condition which in the absence of auditing would seek
unsuccessfully to separate while attacking. As the pe’s attention
is guided to the items involved the games condition activates
and is expressed on the meter as a ragged, frantic response. The
wider the response the more recognizable (to the pc) is the
reality of the games condition and the violence of the conflict.
(HCOB 8 Nov 62) 4. as a meter representation, is the result of
innumerable committed overts in a certain direction, and when
you've got that certain direction isolated, that is to say the items
against which the overts were committed isolated you then have
of course a rock slam. (SH Spec 203, 6210C11) 5. a crazy,
irregular, unequal, jerky motion of the needle narrow as one
inch or as wide as three inches, happening several times a

356
ROLL BOOK

second. The needle goes crazy, slamming back and forth,
narrowly, widely over on the left, over on the right, in a mad
war dance or as if it were frantically trying to escape. It means
hot terminal or hot anything in an assessment and takes
precedence over a fall. (EME, p. 17) 6. this is the most difficult
needle response to find or attain or preserve. And it is the most
valuable in clearing. All rock slams result from a pair of items
in opposition, one of which is a terminal, the other being an
opposition terminal. It can exist in present time where the pc is
the terminal and what the pc is faced with is the opposition
terminal. (HCOB 8 Nov 62) 7. is the read of the rock vs the
opposition rock and every pair above them on the cycle of the
GPM. It marks the path to the rock. (HCOB 6 Dec 62) 8. is a
convulsion of the mind and can reflect as a convulsion of the
body. (HCOB 19 Sept 62) 9. the rock slam is called a rock slam
because it is a needle manifestation which is achieved when the
auditor is approaching what we once called the rock. (SH Spec
190, 6209C 18)

ROCK SLAM CHANNEL, 1. the pathway through the pairs of
items that compose a cycle of the GPM and lead to the rock and
goal. (HCOB 6 Dec 62) 2. that hypothetical course between a
series of pairs consisting of terminals and opposition terminals.
(HCOB 8 Nov 62)

ROCK SLAMMER, 1. a person is an R/Ser where R/Ses have to
do with Sen or one or more areas of the old Sen List One found
in the Book of E-meter Drills. (HCOB 1 Nov 74) 2. a person who
rock slams on Sen or auditors or the like. (HCOB 17 Oct 62) 3. it
isn’t somebody you can get a rock slam on, you would be wrong
if you assumed that. It means it’s somebody who gets a rock
slam when you ask them: “Consider overts against Scn” and that
broadens out of course against Ron, against the organization or
against an auditor. (SH Spec 198, 6210C04)

ROCKSLAMMING LIST, things R/Sing when they were written
down. One rockslam on it at least. (SH Spec 225, 6212C13)

ROLL BOOK, the master record of a course giving the student’s
name, local and permanent address and the date of enrollment
and departure or completion. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

357
ROLLER-COASTER

ROLLER-COASTER, 1. a case that betters and worsens. A
roller-coaster is always connected to a suppressive person and
will not get steady gains until the suppressive is found on the
case or the basic suppressive person earlier. Because the case
doesn’t get well he or she is a potential trouble source to us, to
others and to himself. (HCOB 8 Nov 65) 2. a slump after a gain.
Pes who do not hold their gains are PTS. (HCOB 9 Dec 71RA)
3. gets better, gets worse, gets better, gets worse. (SH Spec 63,
6506C08)

ROLLER-COASTERING, the PTS is known by roller-coastering
(Coney Island fast up and down quarter-mile of aerial railway).
They slump. (HCOB 3 Apr 66)

ROLLING A PHRASE, repeating or rolling a phrase in an engram
in order to de-intensify the phrase or reduce the engram. This is
not repeater technique. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 68)

ROLLYCOASTER CASE, Slang. a potential trouble source, and
just on the other side of him there is a suppressive person
invalidating his gains. He’s never going to get any better, not
until he is labeled a potential trouble source and told to handle.
(SH Spec 61, 6505C18)

ROTE STYLE AUDITING, muzzled auditing or repetitive com-
mand auditing. (HCOB 6 Nov 64)

ROUGH CASE, 1. no case gain. (HCO Exec Ltr, 3 May 65)
2. unreality case. (HCOB 6 Dec 58)

ROUGH PC, the characteristic of the rough pe is not a pe’s
tendency to ARC break and scream but something much more
subtle. The pe who makes no gain is the pe who will not as-is,
who will not confront, who can be audited forever without
cogniting on anything. The person whose “thought has no effect
on his or her bank” he’s been remarked on by me for years. This
person is so afraid to find out that he or she will not permit
anything to appear and therefore nothing will as-is, therefore,
no cognition. (HCOB 15 Mar 62)

ROUTE 1, ROUTE 2, intensive procedure: outline in the use of
this procedure, only two types of case are considered, and the
procedure is adapted to these two types. The sole criteria of the

358
ROUTINE 2C

case is whether or not it can be exteriorized. This is promptly
established by the use of ARC straightwire. When there is no
noticeable communication lag, then Route 1 is employed in this
procedure. When there is any noticeable communication lag,
Route 2 is employed. (COHA, p. 23) [Route 1 and Route 2 are
fully covered in Creation of Human Ability. ]

ROUTINE, a standard process, designed for the best steady gain
of the pe at that level. (HCOB 11 Dec 64) Abbr. R

ROUTINE 1, 1. is CCHs and Joburg security checks. (SH Spec 7,
6106C05) 2. applying control so as to get him into communication
so that he can have. (SH Spec 18, 6106C22)

ROUTINE 1A, 1. is simply familiarization with problems and
getting off the fellow’s withholds with security checks. (SH Spec
27, 6107C11) 2. any combination of processes which combines
problems and security checks, and that is all. (SH Spec 27,
6107C11)

ROUTINE 1C, R-1C, consists of (1) finding something that moves
the TA; (2) running the TA out of that subject to F/N, cog,
VGIs. The usual method of finding what to run in general R-1C
is by assessment of dynamics. Assessment by dynamics gives a
series of questions covering each of the dynamics. This is
assessed by tone arm as given in E-meter Drill 23. Take up the
reading question by use of further questions on that same
subject. (BTB 4 Dec 71R I)

ROUTINE 1(CM, R-1CM, that’s fishing with TA on the meter. It’s
picking up the things that blew down the meter while the guy
was itsaing. It was actually a specialized application of R-1C.
(SH Spec 14, 6404C10)

ROUTINE 2, 1. is a general run of the Pre-hav scale, Joburg
security check, and the havingness and confront processes all
run in model session. (SH Spec 7, 6106C05) 2. getting out of the
road the fixed reactive buttons which prevent him from having
things. (SH Spec 18, 6106C22)

ROUTINE 2C, 1. R-2C Slow Assessment by Dynamics. This form
is a breakdown of the eight dynamics into areas where impor-
tant itsa may be developed. The stress of this assessment is on

359
ROUTINE 2-G

TA motion. (BTB 17 Oct 63R) 2. a process which is discussion by
lists. (SH Spec 14, 6404C10)

ROUTINE 2-G, a goal finding activity. (HCOB 13 Apr 63)

ROUTINE 2-G1, R2-G1 is a special goals prepcheck administered
before a goal is found. This is a refined version of the problems
intensive, slanted directly at goals. (HCOB 13 Apr 63)

ROUTINE 2-GPH, R2-GPH is a special goals prepcheck done by
pre-hav levels with a new assessment for each button. This is a
refined use of the original Routine 2. (HCOB 13 Apr 63)

ROUTINE 2-GxX, is a goal finding routine consisting of the nearly
exact pattern of a problems intensive but asking a different
question, which adds up to listing times in the pe’s life when his
purpose was baulked and assessing and running as in a problems
intensive. (HCOB 4 Mar 63, Urgent)

ROUTINE 2-GX1, is a goals intensive by prepcheck. (SH Spec
251, 6303C21)

ROUTINE 2-H, it is a very valuable unlimited process that
undercuts repetitive processes and produces tone arm action on
cases that have none on repetitive processes. R2-H combines the
most difficult steps of engram running, dating, assessing,
locating and indicating by-passed charge. It disposes of ARC
breaks. (HCOB 25 Jun 63)

ROUTINE 2-10, (R2-12 short form for beginners). The short form
of R2-12 can be used by untrained auditors with some effect
until they are trained in mid ruds and other niceties. (HCOB
5 Dec 62)

ROUTINE 2-12, 1. method of discharging the influence of a rock
slamming item is actually taken from 3GA Criss Cross
(83GAXX), and is a specialized routine from Routine 3. We will,
however, since it does not touch goals, designate it as Routine 2.
(HCOB 23 Nov 62) 2. is simply an effort to locate one of the GPM
items as it seems to be in present time to the pe. It’s an effort to
locate that item in present time and find its opposition. (SH Spec
218, 6211C27) 3. the action of Routine 2-12 is not the key-out of
the pe’s bank as in prepchecking but the actual eradication of

360
ROUTINE 3A

those items which have been keyed in by present time which
then and thereafter keep the pc in the grip of a present time
problem. (SH Spec 218, 6211027) 4. is to put the case in
condition so that it can show progress toward clearing and does
actually progress the case toward clearing and is a clearing
procedure. (SH Spec 218, 6211027)

ROUTINE 2-12A, simply dropped out some unnecessary points in
2-12, threw away tiger drilling and so forth. (SH Spec 236,
6302C12)

ROUTINE 2-16, Opening Procedure of 8-C. (COHA, p. 44)

ROUTINE 2-17, Opening Procedure by Duplication. (COHA,
p. 47)

ROUTINE 3, 1. consists solely of finding a goal, then finding a
terminal that matches the goal and running the terminal, and
then finding another terminal for that goal, and another
terminal for that goal, till that goal disappeared. And then
finding that the goal had probably disappeared, and finding
another goal, and finding a terminal for that goal, and so on. And
finding and auditing that and then finding another terminal and
auditing that, and finally it disappeared. And eventually you got
into the situation where you'd find a goal and it would blow up
and you'd find a terminal and it would blow up, and then you
just couldn’t find anything, and you got a free needle. What
you've done in essence was to pick off a number of pieces of the
goals problem mass so the pe was floating free of the goals
problem mass. (SH Spec 139, 6204C26) 2. getting out of the road
all these unrealized goals each one of which has been a defeat for
him at some time or another, all of which goals had as their end
product havingness. (SH Spec 18, 6106C22) 3. SOP goals
assessment with a Joburg security check. (SH Spec 7, 6106C05)

ROUTINE 3A, 1. in R-3A you took the goal and the modifier and
you found the terminal with goal and modifier. (SH Spec 139,
6204C26) 2. a way to undercut the speed of a goals terminal run.
This consists of a discovery of a new piece of the puzzle—the
modifier. By use of the modifier the basic terminal of a goals
chain may be isolated without running off the upper terminal.
(HCOB 7 Nov 61)

361
ROUTINE 3D

ROUTINE 3D, 1. in Routine 3D you found the goal and the
modifier and the terminal and then the opposition terminal. (SH
Spec 189, 6204C26) 2. in 3D you're actually taking apart, from a
distance, the component parts of the goals problem mass. (SH
Spec 82, 6111C21) Abbr. R-3D.

ROUTINE 3D CRISS CROSS, 1. a process which addresses the
goals problem mass. (SH Spec 137, 6204C24) 2. why do we say
criss cross? That’s just because you go from one channel to the
other channel, and then you go back to the other channel. What
do we mean by Channel? We mean what the pe has been and
what the pe has opposed. (SH Spec 202A, 6210C23) 3. earlier
version of 3GAXX. (LRH Def. Notes) Abbr. 3DXX.

ROUTINE 3D CRISS CROSS ITEMS, the items, the identities
and the beingnesses which the person has actually been. Don't
call them so much a beingness as an identity. They are a
package of conduct, they are a package of training patterns and
so forth, which are residual from that particular life. (SH Spec
116, 6202C27)

ROUTINE-3G, Routine Three employing goals. (SH Spec 141,
6205C01)

ROUTINE 3 GA CRISS CROSS, see THREE GA XX.

ROUTINE 3H, R-3H, ARC break process (R-4H renamed R-3H).
(HCOB 22 Sept 65)

ROUTINE 3M, R3M is a clearing technique. (HCOB 22 Feb 63)

ROUTINE 3-MX, is called X because it’s still experimental and

therefore its designation is really Routine 3M. (SH Spec 235,
6302C07)

ROUTINE 3-N, R3N is a stripped down directive Routine Three
which uses line plots. (SH Spec 263, 6305C14)

ROUTINE 3N2, R3N2 is an abbreviated form of R3N. (SH Spec
266, 6805C21)

ROUTINE 3-R, 1. R3R Engram Running by Chains is designated
“Routine 3-R” to fit in with other modern processes. (HCOB
24 Jun 63) 2. Routine 3 Revised. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

ROUTINE 3-SC, 1. Routine Three, Service Facsimile Clear.
(HCOB 1 Sept 68) 2. in R3SC you are only trying to end the

362
R6-EW §

compulsive character of the service facsimile so found and get it
off automatic and get the pc to see it better. (HCOB 1 Sept 63)

ROUTINE 4-H, R4H, Routine Four. Process used to relieve ARC
breaks. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

ROUTINE 4-SC, R4SC, Routine Four. Process used to locate and
run service facsimiles. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

ROUTINE 6 END WORDS (R6EW), when the pc has taken the
locks off the reactive mind itself, using R6EW, he attains Fourth
Stage Release. (HCOB 30 Aug 65) [Grade VI Release]

RR, rocket read—type of meter read. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
R/S, rock slam, type of meter read. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
R/Ser, see ROCK SLAMMER.

R/S HANDLING, also called the Responsibility RD, is done as
OCA right-hand side handling. A list of all R/Sing statements is
made, then each taken up. The idea is an R/S will occur in
connection with a terminal which will read when checked and
that’s what you want to run. (HCOB 28 Mar 74, Expanded
Dianetics Series No. 21)

RSM, “Royal Scotman”. (FO 1483) [The Flagship’s name before it
became the “Apollo”]

R/S PC, RSes=psychosis=succumb, is trying to die (evil
purpose) and the auditor is trying to make him live. This gives
you an intention-counter-intention=problem, so all such pes are
problems to audit. (BTB 30 Aug 72 II)

R/S STATEMENTS, statements which the pe said that R/Sed
when he said it. (BTB 8 Nov 72R II)

R6, 1. Routine Six. (HCOB 23 Aug 65) 2. abbreviation for Routine
6. It means the exact processes and aspects of case handled at
Level VI of Sen. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

R6 BANK, the reactive mind. (HCOB 12 Jul 65)
R6EW, Routine 6 End Words. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
R6-EW P, Routine 6 End Word Plot. (HCOB 4 Jan 65)
R6-EW S, Routine 6 End Word Sixes. (HCOB 4 Jan 65)
363
R6GPMI

R6GPMI, Routine Six Running GPMs by Items. (HCOB 23 Aug
65)

R60, Routine Six Original Bank. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
R6R, Routine 6 Review of all bank run. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

RUDIMENTS, 1. setting the case up for the session action. This
includes ARC breaks, PTPs, W/Hs, GF or O/R listing or any
prepared list. (HCOB 23 Aug 71) 2. the rudiments apply to
present time and this universe now. They are a nowness series
of processes. (SH Spec 31, 6205C13) 3. a rudiment is that which
is used to get the pc in shape to be audited that session. (SH
Spec 147, 6205017) 4. the reason you use and clean rudiments is
to get the pe in session so you can have the pe (1) in
communication with the auditor and (2) interested in own case.
The purpose of rudiments is to set up a case to run, not to run a
case. (HCOB 19 May 61)

RUDS, rudiments. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
RUN, undergo processing. (SOS, p. 75)

RUNDOWN, a series of steps which are auditing actions and
processes designed to handle a specific aspect of a case and
which have a known end phenomena. Example: Introspection
Rundown. (LRH Def. Notes)

RUN OUT, erase. (FOT, p. 95)

364
S

SAAC, South African Anatomy Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

SA ACC, South African Advanced Clinical Course. (HCOB 29 Sept
66)

SAD EFFECT, 1. when an ARC break is permitted to continue
over too long a period of time and remains in restimulation a
person goes into a sad effect, which is to say they become sad
and mournful, usually without knowing what is causing it. This
condition is handled by finding the earliest ARC break on the
chain. Finding whether it was a break in affinity, reality,
communication or understanding, and indicating it to the
person, always of course, in session. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. this is
a state of great sadness, apathy, misery and desire for suicide
and death. (HCOB 14 Mar 63)

SADNESS, is a small volume of grief. (SA, p. 93)

SAFE TECHNIQUE, is that technique which always deals in
things of which the preclear is certain. (COHA, p. 220)

SAG, 1. an engram not basic is subject to sag which is to say that
it may be brought to the two point zero (2.0) tone, but after a
¢ertain length of time has elapsed—from one to two days—it

365
SAINT HILL (SH)

will be found to have sagged and to be, for instance, in a one
point one (1.1) tone. It can be successfully lifted until it is
apparently in a three point zero (3.0) tone, at which point much
of its content will disappear. (DTOT, p. 114) 2. any engram may
be exhausted to a point where it will recede. It is temporarily
and momentarily lost to the individual and apparently does not
trouble him. That engram which has been exhausted in a chain
without the basic having been reached will sag or reappear
within twenty-four to sixty hours. (DTOT, p. 189)

SAINT HILL (SH), the name of LRH’s home in East Grinstead,
Sussex, England, and location of the world-wide headquarters of
Sen, and the UK Advanced Organization and SH (AOSH UK).
LRH taught the original Saint Hill Special Briefing Course at
Saint Hill from 1961 to 1965. The term SH now applies to any
organization authorized to deliver those upper level Scn services
hence we also have the “American Saint Hill Organization”
(ASHO) and the “Advanced Organization and Saint Hill in
Denmark” (AOSH DK) and “Saint Hill Europe” (SH EU). (BTB
12 Apr 72R)

Saint Hill

SAINT HILL SPECIAL BRIEFING COURSE, the Saint Hill
Special Briefing Course has certain distinct purposes. The
course was begun to do two things: (1) to study and resolve
training and education; (2) to assist people who wanted to

366
SANITY

perfect their Sen. There has been no change in these purposes.
The first is succeeding very well. The second is achieving
world-wide recognition through people who have graduated the
SHSBC. (HCO PL 9 Jul 62) Abbr. SHSBC.

SALVAGE, to save from ruin. (HCO PL 23 Oct 65)
S AND D, search and discovery. (HCOB 18 Jan 68)

S AND D TYPE §, is “Who or what are you trying to stop?”
(HCOB 13 Jan 68)

S AND D TYPE U, there are several types of S and D (Search
and Discovery). The type is determined by the first letter of the
key word in the listing question. S and D Type U is “Who or
what has attempted to unmock you?” (HCOB 18 Jan 68)

S AND D TYPE W,, is “Who or what are you trying to withdraw
from?” (HCOB 13 Jan 68)

SANDERSON R/D, the “Wants Handled R/D” as outlined in
Expanded Dianetic Series 9, HCOB 10 Jun 72 was originally
called the “Sanderson R/D” on Flag. (BTB 30 Aug 72)

SANITY, 1. the ability to recognize differences, similarities and
identities. (HCO PL 26 Apr 70 R) 2. a tolerance of confusion and
an agreed-upon stable datum on which to align the data in a
confusion are at once necessary for a sane reaction on the eight
dynamics. This defines sanity. (Sen 0-8, p. 36) 3. the computa-
tion of futures. (Scn 0-8, p. 89) 4. a balance of creation and
destruction is sanity. The individual is sane wherever he will
create and destroy. (Scn 8-8008, p. 99) 5. the legal definition of
sanity is the “ability to tell right from wrong.” (PAB 63) 6. the
ability to tell differences. The better one can tell differences, no
matter how minute, and know the width of those differences,
the more rational he is. The less one can tell differences and the
closer one comes to thinking in identities (A=A) the less sane
he is. (DMSMH, p. 338) 7. sanity is the measure of how ably an
individual assists things which assist survival, and inhibits
things which inhibit survival. (5109CM24A) 8. the degree of
rationality of an individual. (DASF) 9. rationality. A man is sane
in the ratio that he can compute accurately, limited only by

367
SC

information and viewpoint. (HOS, p. 42) 10. an absolute perfec-
tion in reasoning, which would resolve problems to the optimum
good of all those concerned. (52083CM03A) 11. sanity is certainty,
providing only that that certainty does not fall beyond the
conviction of another when he views it. (COHA, p. 187)

SC, Success Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

SCALE OF REALITY, 1. the reality scale refers to the individ-
ual’s hold on reality and his agreement with others on what
reality is. (NOTL, p. 103) 2. at the bottom there is nothing,
above that there is a communication line, the line becomes more
solid, then above that terminals begin to materialize lightly and
the line becomes less solid, then above that you have the
terminals and you don’t have any lines, and above that the
terminals are there mostly by agreement, above that there is
agreement, and above agreement there is consideration, indi-
vidual consideration, and above that there is postulate. That is
the Seale of Reality. (PAB 154)

SCANNING, 1. the action of rapidly glancing through an incident
from beginning (earliest moment of the incident) to the end of
the incident. (HCOB 12 Dec 71 IX) 2. one contacts an incident
and recognizes it as a concept of an incident. The preclear then
goes forward from this incident to the next one of a similar type
that he can recognize. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 126) :

SCHEDULING, the hours of a course or the designation of certain
times for auditing. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 ITI)

SCHIZO, nickname for schizophrenic. It is an odd misnomer in
that it means split personality and the trouble with a schizo is
that he needs splitting, not that he’s split. He’s in another's
valence and what is required is to remove or split the preclear
out of that other’s valence. (PAB 106)

SCHIZOPHRENIC, 1. the original definition of schizophrenic or
“scissors personality” was in observation of shift of identity. A
case which is very heavily charged goes into valences so
completely that the person sharply and distinctly changes
personality and appearance when shifted from one valence to
another. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 200) 2. the schizophrenic is an

368
SCIENTOLOGY

individual who has several portions of the analyzer segmented
off by different circuits, which are actually valences, and who
goes from one to another of these portions of the analyzer, only
occasionally, if ever, becoming himself. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 49) 3. an
idea that one is two persons, which is remediable by a discovery
of the life continuums being dramatized by the individual. (PDC
14) 4. the multi-valent aberee. (DMSMH, p. 125)

SCIENCE, 1. a science is an organized body of knowledge which
knowledge, where, when you look, knowledge will be found. It
doesn’t have variables in it. (5009CM23 General Dianetics—Part
1) 2. a science is not merely a collection of facts, neatly
arranged. An essential of a science is that observations give rise
to theories which, in turn, predict new observations. When the
new observations are made, they, in turn, give rise to better
theories, which predict further observations. (Scn 8-80, p. 8)

SCIENTIFIC TRUTH, something which was workably and invar-
iably right for the body of knowledge in which it lay. (DASF)

SCIENTOLOGIST, 1. one who betters the conditions of himself
and the conditions of others by using Sen technology. (Aud 73
UK) 2. one who controls persons, environments and situations.
A Scientologist operates within the boundaries of the Auditor’s
Code and the Code of a Scientologist. (PAB 187) 3. one who
understands life. His technical skill is devoted to the resolution
of the problems of life. (COHA, p. 12) 4. a specialist in spiritual
and human affairs. (Abi Ma 1)

SCIENTOLOGY, 1. it is formed from the Latin word scio, which
means know or distinguish, being related to the word scindo,
which means cleave. (Thus, the idea of differentiation is strongly
implied.) It is formed from the Greek word logos, which means
THE WORD, or OUTWARD FORM BY WHICH THE INWARD
THOUGHT IS EXPRESSED AND MADE KNOWN: also THE
INWARD THOUGHT or REASON ITSELF. Thus, SCIEN-
TOLOGY means KNOWING ABOUT KNOWING, or SCIENCE
OF KNOWLEDGE. (Sen 8-80, p. 8) 2. Scientology addresses
the thetan. Scientology is used to increase spiritual freedom,

369
SCIENTOLOGY CLEAR

intelligence, ability, and to produce immortality. (HCOB 22
Apr 69) 3. an organized body of scientific research knowl-
edge concerning life, life sources and the mind and includes
practices that improve the intelligence, state and conduct of
persons. (HCOB 9 Jul 59) 4. a religious philosophy in its
highest meaning as it brings man to total freedom and truth.
(HCOB 18 Apr 67) 5. the science of knowing how to know
answers. It is a wisdom in the tradition of ten thousand years of
search in Asia and Western civilization. It is the science of
human affairs which treats the livingness and beingness of man,
and demonstrates to him a pathway to greater freedom. (COHA,
p. 9) 6. an organization of the pertinencies which are mutually
held true by all men in all times, and the development of
technologies which demonstrate the existence of new phenom-
ena not hitherto known, which are useful in creating states of
beingness considered more desireable by man. (COHA, p. 9)
7. the science of knowing how to know. It is the science of know-
ing sciences. It seeks to embrace the sciences and humanities as a
clarification of knowledge itself. Into all these things—biology,
physics, psychology and life itself—the skills of Scientology can
bring order and simplification. (Sen 8-8008, p. 11) 8. the study of
the human spirit in its relationship to the physical universe and
its living forms. (Abi 146) 9. a science of life. It is the one thing
senior to life because it handles all the factors of life. It contains
the data necessary to live as a free being. A reality in
Scientology is a reality on life. (Aud 27 UK) 10. a body of
knowledge which, when properly used, gives freedom and truth
to the individual. (COHA, p. 251) 11. Scientology is an organized
body of scientific research knowledge concerning life, life
sources and the mind and includes practices that improve the
intelligence, state and conduct of persons. (A bil Mi 104) 12. knowl-
edge and its application in the conquest of the material uni-
verse. (HCL 1, 5203CM03A) 13. an applied philosophy designed
and developed to make the able more able. In this sphere it is
tremendously successful. (HCO PL 27 Oct 64) 14. an applied
religious philosophy dealing with the study of knowledge, which
through the application of its technology, can bring about desir-
able changes in the conditions of life. (HCO PL 15 Apr 71R)

SCIENTOLOGY CLEAR, see CLEAR.

370
SCIENTOLOGY 8-8008

SCIENTOLOGY CROSS, a cross about three inches high and is of
simple but effective design without lettering or other ornament.
The model of the cross came from a very ancient Spanish
mission in Arizona, a sand casting which was dug up by Ron.
The cross is a regular Roman cross with four additional short
points between the four long points, a true eight dynamic Sen
cross; the sunburst cross. (Abil 14)

Scientology Cross

®

SCIENTOLOGY 8-8008, 1. was a formula. It said: the attainment
of infinity, that is the first eight is achieved by the reduction of
the physical universe from infinity, that is the second eight, to
zero, which is the first zero and the building of one’s own
universe from zero to an infinity of one’s own universe and by
that one achieves the attainment of infinity. (9ACC 14,
5412CM24) 2. the roadmap of a process. And it says, the
attainment of infinity by the reduction of the apparency of the
mest universe is infinity to zero and the increase of one’s own
apparent zero to an infinity of his own universe. (PDC 31) 3. the
original definition of Scientology 8-8008 was the attainment of
infinity by the reduction of the apparent infinity and power of
the mest universe to a zero for himself, and the increase of the
apparent zero of one’s own universe to an infinity for oneself.
Infinity (co) stood upright makes the number eight. (Scn 8-8008,
p. 31)

371
SCIENTOLOGY FIVE

SCIENTOLOGY FIVE, Sen applied at a high echelon to social,
political and scientific problems. This requires the earlier levels
and a high state of training on theoretical and wide application
levels and the personal state of OT. (HCO PL 2 Aug 63)

SCIENTOLOGY FOUR, processes to OT, Saint Hill Special
Briefing Course, 1963 type technology and targets. (HCO PL 2
Aug 63)

SCIENTOLOGY GRADATION CHART, see CLASSIFICATION,
GRADATION AND AWARENESS CHART.

SCIENTOLOGY LIBRARY AND RESEARCH LTD., took charge
of the millions of words on tapes, the tons of original Sen
materials and the manufacture of all the new course books and
level manuals of Sen. (HCO Info Ltr 5 Feb 64) Abbr. S.L.R.

SCIENTOLOGY, LIST ONE, see LIST ONE.

SCIENTOLOGY ONE, Sen is now partitioned into five levels. Sen
‘One: usable data about living and life, applicable without
training, presented in continental magazines and booklets. This
is for anyone. It contains assists as its auditing level. Sen One is
itself divided into theory (data about life, the mind, beingness
and the universe), practical (drills one can do to raise one’s
ability to handle others and situations), and auditing (assists,
ways to get relaxed, ways to cheer up, ways to handle situations
etc. in the everyday business of living, ways to process people
without knowing much about processing, ways to get people to
pass exams, do their work, get along). (HCO PL 2 Aug 63)

SCIENTOLOGY PRECLEAR, a well and happy human being who
is being processed toward total ability and spiritual freedom.
(HCOB 6 Apr 69)

SCIENTOLOGY PROCESSES, could be described as methods of
“unhypnotizing” men to their own freer choice and better life.
(COHA, p. 251)

SCIENTOLOGY RELEASE, a series of major levels of gain
wherein Sen processing frees the person from the principal life
difficulties or personal “blocks” stemming from the mind. Called

372
SCIENTOLOGY ZERO

release grades, each of these levels must be completed for one to
be ready to undertake Sen clearing. (DTOT, p. 151)

SCIENTOLOGY SYMBOL, 1. the S and double triangle. The S
stands for scio (knowing in the fullest sense). The lower triangle
is the ARC triangle, its points being affinity, reality, communi-
cation which combined give understanding. The upper triangle
is the KRC triangle. The points are K for knowledge, R for
responsibility and C for control. (6001C03)

Scientology Symbol

SCIENTOLOGY THREE, clearing and OT preparatory levels
including advanced auditing above HPA/HCA level. The work
on this was more or less suspended when it became obvious that
OT had to be attained. Includes key-out clearing and other sub
OT states. However, much technology exists on it. This is the
level of the better human being. (HCO PL 2 Aug’ 68)

SCIENTOLOGY TWO, academy HPA/HCA accomplishment
level. Sen for use in spiritual healing. This is a healing strata,
using the wealth of past processes which produced results on
various illnesses. The auditing level is reach and withdraw and
repetitive processes. The target is human illness. (HCO PL 2
Aug 63)

SCIENTOLOGY ZERO, 1. Scientology Zero is the problems and
confusions and wrongnesses, zones of chaos of existence and the
identification of those zones of chaos. At Scientology Zero you
merely want the people to become aware of the fact of what the

373
SCIENTOMETRIC TESTING

problem is. (SH Spec 310, 6309C25) 2. descriptions of the
environment and what is wrong with it. Scientology Zero simply
takes care of the environment in which the person lives. The
whole subject is instantly summatable in it’s own heading which
is “the dangerous environment.” (SH Spec 328, 6312C10)

SCIENTOMETRIC TESTING, IQ and personality tests reworked
and modernized and co-ordinated with an_ electro-psycho-
galvanometer. The results are more accurate than psychological
tests. This is Scientometry. This is not psychology. These tests
are more modern, being electronically co-ordinated. (HCO PL 24
Nov 60)

SCL, Study Correction List. (BTB 1 Nov 72)
SCN, Scientology. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

SCOUTING, this is a two-way comm activity. Guide the pc
carefully around his life until he gets on a sticky point. Then sort
it out, attempting to get parts of it to clear up. Do not let pc
linger on matters which do not stick. Responsibility sorts the
matter out. His realization (cognition) of various zones are what
does him good. (HCOB 28 Jul 58)

SCP, Standard Clearing Procedure. (HCOB 29 May 58)

SCRAMBLER, scrambles incidents and phrases. (I’m confused, I'll
take mine scrambled, stir it up, it’s all mixed up and I’m in the
middle.) (SOS Gloss)

SCRATCHY NEEDLE, for some reason or other the term
scratchy needle didn’t survive but dirty needle did. (SH Spec
202A, 6210C23)

SCREAMER, 1. a case which has maximum charge but not a
great deal of circuitry. The supercharge on the case is so great
on the reactive bank that the case bleeds quickly. This is your
screamer. Emotion releases suddenly. (NOTL, p. 70) 2. people
who ordinarily “run” (undergo processing) in Dn quite noisily.
(SOS, p. 75)

SCREEN, 1. the cycle of the preclear who has been taught to hate
things is that he begins to resist them and eventually piles up

374
SEA ORGANIZATION

energy against them to such a degree that he makes an actual
deposit which is an occlusion and which has on his side of it
complete blackness and on the reverse side of it the piled-up
facsimiles of that thing which he is resisting. This sereen, then,
has a hunger for the thing which it was resisting; and if this
screen is fed whatever it was set up to resist, it will dissolve.
(PAB 8) 2. the sereen is actually a ridge that is formed for a
special purpose of protection. (Scn 8-80, p. 43)

S-C-S, Start-Change-Stop. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

SEA ORGANIZATION, 1. in 1968 the Sea Org became a good-will
activity and an efficient administrative arm of Scientology. The
Sea Org runs the advanced organizations and is the custodian of
the Clear and OT processing materials. (Ron’s Journal 1968) 2. is
that organization which functions at a high level of confront and
standard. Its purpose is to get ethics in on the planet and
eventually the universe. This organization operates with a fleet
of ships dedicated to this purpose around the world. Being
mobile and separate from the pull of land is an absolute
necessity to accomplish its plans, missions and purpose: to get
ethics in. (FO 508)

Sea Organization Symbol

375
SEARCH AND DISCOVERY

SEARCH AND DISCOVERY, as a process is done exactly by the
general rules of listing. One lists for persons or groups who are
or have suppressed the pc. The list is complete when only one
item reads on nulling and this is the item. (HCOB 24 Nov 65)
Abbr. S AND D. (HCOB 13 Jan 68)

SEC CHECK, security check. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

<7) B

Secondary

SECONDARY, 1. a mental image picture of a moment of severe
and shocking loss or threat of loss which contains misemotion
such as anger, fear, grief, apathy or “deathfulness.” It is a
mental image recording of a time of severe mental stress. It may
contain unconsciousness. Called a secondary because it itself
depends upon an earlier engram with similar data but real pain,
etc. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) 2. depends for its charge on an engram
which contains pain and unconsciousness. It’s secondary. It does

376
SECONDARY ENGRAM

not contain pain and unconsciousness. It contains emotion, any
emotion or misemotion. But of course pleasure doesn’t make a
secondary and it also doesn’t make an incident. (SH Spec 70,
6607C21) 3. every moment of great emotional shock, where loss
occasions near unconsciousness, is fully recorded in the reactive
mind. These shocks of loss are known as secondaries. (SOS,
p. xiii) 4. a mental image picture containing misemotion
(encysted grief, anger, apathy, etc.) and a real or imagined loss.
These contain no physical pain—they are moments of shock and
stress and depend for their force on earlier engrams which have
been restimulated by the circumstances of the secondary. (PXL,
p. 250) 5. a moment of misemotion where loss is threatened or
accomplished. Secondaries contain only misemotion and commu-
nication and reality enforcements and breaks. (SOS, p. 112) 6. a
very severe moment of loss. It’s either anger against losing, fear
of losing, or fear because one has lost, or the recognition that
one has lost. (PDC 4) 7. a mental image picture of a moment of
severe and shocking loss or threat of loss which contains
unpleasant emotion such as anger, fear, grief, apathy or
“deathfulness.” It is a mental image recording of a time of
severe mental stress. A secondary is called a secondary because
it itself depends upon an earlier engram with similar data but
real pain. (DPB, p. 6)

SECONDARY ENGRAM, 1. defined as a period of anguish
brought about by a major loss or a threat of loss to the
individual. The secondary engram depends for its strength and
force upon physical pain engrams which underlie it. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 136) 2. the secondary engram is called secondary because it
depends upon an earlier physical pain engram to exist being
itself occasioned by a conscious moment of loss. It is called an
engram in order to focus the attention of the auditor on the fact
that it must be run as an engram and that all perceptics possible
must be exhausted from it. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 149) 3. secondary
(A-R-C) engrams, have more charge than locks. These charges
on the A-R-C are so-called because they charge up the case.
Engrams won't have charge without later incidents. If you could
get all the grief off a case and do nothing else, you would have a
release. You are trying to blow these charges so the engrams
will not very badly affect a person. (NOTL, p. 35) 4. there are

377
SECONDARY SCALE

three types of secondary engrams impinged on physical pain
engrams: (1) painful emotion—grief—broken affinity, (2)
encysted communication, (3) invalidated reality. (VOTL, p. 29)

SECONDARY SCALE, the pre-havingness scale contains a
primary scale and a secondary scale. The secondary scale
contains nearly all simple verbs in the English language,
properly placed for level and repeated on other levels. (HCOB 23
May 61)

SECONDARY STYLE, every level has a different primary style
of auditing. But sometimes in actual sessions or particularly in
assists this style is altered slightly for special purposes. The
style altered for assists or for a particular process in a regular
session is called a secondary style. It is done a precise but
different way to accomplish assists or to assist a pe in a regular
session. This variation is called the secondary style of that level.
(HCOB 21 Feb 66)

SECONDARY UNIVERSE, it isn’t really his universe. It’s
pictures of the physical universe which he retains in lieu of.
We're talking of the reactive mind, the facsimiles, engrams,
energy pictures, as a secondary universe which is formed by
reason of not being able to have the physical universe. And
that’s how the reactive mind gets born and where it comes from.
These secondary universes could just as well be called reactive
universes. (Abii 34, 1956)

SECOND-DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.

SECOND FACSIMILES, are “photographs” of the memories of
another. They are still pictures usually. Their characteristic is
that they show up with only two or three pictures of some long
situation. (HOM, p. 36)

SECOND GPM, the next-to-the-latest GPM on the track. (SH
Spec 251, 6303C22)

SECOND PHENOMENON, the second phenomenon is the overt
cycle which follows a misunderstood word. When a word is not
grasped, the student then goes into a non-comprehension
(blankness) of things immediately after. This is followed by the
student’s solution for the blank condition which is to individuate

378
SECURITY FORM 7B

from it—separate self from it. Now being something else than
the blank rea, the student commits overts against the more
general area. These overts, of course, are followed by
restraining himself from committing overts. This pulls flows
toward the person and makes the person crave motivators. This
is followed by various mental and physical conditions and by
various complaints, fault-finding and look-what-you-did-to-me.
This justifies a departure, a blow. (HCO PL 24 Sept 64)

SECOND POSTULATE, know. (PAB 66)
SECOND STAGE RELEASE, see STAGES OF RELEASE.

SECOND WIND, is really getting enough environment and
enough mass in order to run out the exhaustion of the last race.
There is no such thing as “second wind.” There is such a thing as
a return to extroversion on the physical world in which one
lives. (POW, pp. 97-98)

SECRET, 1. withheld thought. (PAB 131) 2. it is the answer
which was never given and that is all a secret is. (Dn 55!, p. 76)

SECURITY, 1. security itself is an understanding. Men who know
are secure. Insecurity exists in the absence of knowledge. All
security derives from knowledge. (POW, p. 16) 2. self-confi-
dence alone is security. Your ability is your security. There
is no security but you. (HFP, p. 53) 3. is not a static thing.
Security would lie only in a man’s confidence in reaching his
goals and indeed, in his having goals to reach. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 86)

SECURITY CHECKING, 1. remedying the compulsion or obses-
sion to commit actions which have to be withheld, i.e. we are
remedying unreasonable action. (SH Spec 100, 6201C16) 2. a
check made to see whether a person has any counter-intentions
toward Sen or Scientology Churches. (Adil 218) Abbr. Sec
Checking or Sec ¥ ing.

SECURITY FORM 7A, security check devised specifically to
check applicants for employment. (HCOB 28 Sept 61)

SECURITY FORM 7B, security check devised specifically to
check personnel already employed. (HCOB 28 Sept 61)

3879
SEE

SEE, is just the sight band of perception. The photon wave-length
of perception which is a manufactured energy. (PDC 5)

SELF, thetan, plus machines plus body plus reactive bank (in Dn).
(8ACC-13, 5410C19)

SELF ANALYSIS IN SCIENTOLOGY, is a group technique
aimed at the rehabilitation of one’s own universe so as to bring it
up to a level of comparability with one’s own observation of the
mest universe, and can be delivered to groups of children or
adults by a person trained only through the text of Self Analysis
in Scientology. (COHA, p. 245)

SELF ANALYSIS LISTS, 1. the lists of questions by which the
individual can explore his past and improve his reactions toward
life. Dianetically speaking, this self-processing section could be
called “straight wire.” It is not “auto processing.” The reader is
actually being processed by the author. (SA, p. 62) 2. the
auditor is assisted by these lists in that they open a case for the
running of engrams and secondaries and raise the preclear on a
tone scale. These lists are used repetitively; that is to say the
individual goes over them again and again. There is no finite
period to the work. The reason the recall of these questions is
important is that they reveal and discharge locks which have
formed above the basic engrams (moments of physical pain and
unconsciousness) and secondaries (moments of acute loss as
death of a loved one). The discharging of these locks renders
engrams and secondaries relatively ineffective. (SA, p. 62)

SELF AUDITING, 1. the manifestation of going around running
concepts or processes on one’s self. One is doing this because he
has been made afraid, through his failure on others, of his ability
to control his own engrams, facsimiles, thoughts and concepts,
and he seeks to control them through auditing. (Dn 55!, p. 121)
2. solo auditing occurs in session with a meter. Self-auditing is
out-of-session wondering and chewing on bank. (HCOB 10 Apr
72) 3. the manifestation of being overwhelmed by masses etc.,
and pulling only think out of the bank. Pulling out think then
pulls in more force which gives more self-audit. (HCOB 19 Jun
70 II) 4. self-auditing is done ordinarily out of valence and

380
SELF-DETERMINISM

results in the preclear expending counter-efforts against
himself. Thus he succeeds only in hurting himself. (AP&A,
p. 31)

SELF-COACHING, the student tending to introvert and look too
much at how he is doing and what he is doing rather than just
doing it. (HCOB 24 May 68)

SELF-CONFIDENCE, 1. nothing more than belief in one’s ability
to decide and in one’s decisions. (HFP, p. 142) 2. is self-
determinism. It is one’s belief in one’s ability to determine his
own causes. (DAB, Vol. II, 1951-52, p. 166)

SELF-DETERMINED, one can only be self-determined when one
can observe the actual situation before one; otherwise a being is
delusion-determined or other-determined. (HCOB 6 Nov 64)

SELF-DETERMINISM, 1. the ability to locate in space and time,
energy and matter; also the ability to create space and time in
which to create and locate energy and matter. (Sen 0-8, p. 25) 2.
self-determinism in the field of motion consists of, by own power
of choice, permitting the object or body to be still or not to be
still; permitting a thing to be changed or not to be changed;
permitting a thing to be started or not to be started. (CMSCS,
p. 18) 3. self-determinism is that state of being where in the
individual can or cannot be controlled by his environment
according to his own choice. In that state the individual has
self-confidence in his control of the material universe and the
organisms within it along every dynamic. He is confident about
any and all abilities or talents he may possess. He is confident in
his interpersonal relationships. He reasons but does not need to
react. (APGA, p. 53) 4. entirely and solely the imposition of
time and space upon energy flows. By imposing time and space
upon objects, people, self, events, and individuals, is causation.
(Sen 8-80, p. 44) 5. the theta control of the organism. (Sen 0-8,
p. 83) 6. full responsibility for self, no responsibility for other
side of game. (Scn 0-8, p. 119) 7. means the ability to direct
himself. (2 ACC 30A, 5312CM21) 8. the individual can only
determine something from his own viewpoint. (SH Spec 83,
6612C06) 9. a condition of determining the actions of self. It is a
first (self) dynamic action and leaves the remaining seven

381
SELF-INVALIDATING ENGRAM

undetermined or, in actuality, in opposition to the self. Thus if
one wants to take on the rest of life in a free-for-all fight, one
could be entirely insistent upon total self-determinism. One is
Self-determined, then, in any situation in which he is fighting.
He is pan-determined in any situation which he is controlling.
(FOT, p. 50) 10. self-determinism meant, in essence, control by
the awareness of awareness unit of that which it conceived to be
its identity. (Dn55/, p. 98)

SELF-INVALIDATING ENGRAM, the engram which contains
the phrases, “never happened,” “can’t believe it,” “wouldn't
possibly imagine it,” and so on. (DTOT, p. 129)

SELF-INVALIDATION, a person who makes huge overts out of
every little action, which is in essence self-invalidation, has
behind that someplace a huge overt—big enough to set the
police of several galaxies after them. (BTB 11 Dec 72R)

SELFNESS, not selfishness but just being himself. (Aud Spec Iss.
1978 ASHO)

SELF-PERPETUATING ENGRAM, implies that “It will always
be this way,” and “It happens all the time.” (DTOT, p. 180)

SELF-PROCESSING, the action of a person trying to run
processes on himself or continually thinking about his own case
or trying to work out what is wrong with himself. It is an
improper action which will only lead to a worsening of the
person’s case. (BTB 12 Apr 72) See also SELF-AUDITING.

SEMI-ACKNOWLEDGEMENT, half acknowledgements. When
you acknowledge what the pce said without ending the cycle of
the auditing command and then say the next auditing
commands. (SH Spec 25, 6107C05)

SEN, sensation. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

SENSATION, 1. uncomfortable perceptions stemming from the
reactive mind (except pain) are called sensation. These are
basically “pressure,” “motion,” “dizziness,” “sexual sensation,”
and “emotion” and “misemotion.” There are others, definite in
themselves but definable in these five general categories. If one
took a fork and pressed it against the arm, that would be

382
SENTIENT

“pressure.” “Motion” is just that, a feeling of being in motion
when one is not. “Motion” includes the “winds of space.” A
feeling of being blown upon, especially from in front of the face.
“Dizziness” is a feeling of disorientation and includes a spin-
niness, as well as an out-of-balance feeling. “Sexual sensation”
means any feeling, pleasant or unpleasant, commonly expe-
rienced during sexual restimulation or action. “Emotion” and
“misemotion” include all levels of the complete tone scale except
“pain”; emotion and misemotion are closely allied to “motion,”
being only a finer particle action. A bank solidity is a form of
“pressure,” and when the sensation of increasing solidity of
masses in the mind occurs, we say “The bank is beefing up.” All
these are classified as sensation. Symbol: Sen. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)
2. all sensation is energy. (2 ACC 26A, 5312CM17)

SENSING DEVICES, sensory organs. (EOS, p. 45)

SENSITIVITY BOOSTER, the meter can be made more sensitive
by turning the sensitivity booster to 32 which will double the
sensitivity or to 64 which quadruples the sensitivity (64 or 128 in
later models). (BIEM, p. 25)

SENSITIVITY KNOB, 1. on the E-meter the sensitivity knob
magnifies the movement of the needle. (BIEM, p. 25) 2. the
sensitivity knob increases the swing of the needle. (EME, p. 13)

Sensitivity Knob

SENSORY CHANNELS, the nerves. (HFP, p. 32)

SENTIENT, responsive to or conscious of sense impressions.
(EOS, p. 43)

383
SEPARATENESS

SEPARATENESS, the object of separateness in locational
processing is to establish and run out identifications.
Commands: Select an object from which you are separate.
Select an object which is separate from you. (Op Bull No. 1, 20
Oct 55)

SERENE VALENCES, when people are in serene valences it
means they are wholly overwhelmed as a thetan. (HCOB 5 Jun
61)

SER FAC, service facsimile. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
SERIES, see GOAL SERIES.

SERIOUS, when interest is important because of penalty. (PDC
59)

SERIOUSLY PHYSICALLY ILL CASES, cases where the illness
makes too much PTP in PT. (HCOB 25 Nov 71 II)

SERVICE FACSIMILE, 1. these are called “service facsimiles.”
“Service” because they serve him. “Facsimiles” because they are
in mental image picture form. They explain his disabilities as
well. The facsimile part is actually a self-installed disability that
“explains” how he is not responsible for being able to cope. So
he is not wrong for not coping. Part of the “package” is to be
right by making wrong. The service facsimile is therefore a
picture containing an explanation of self condition and also a
fixed method of making others wrong. (HCOB 15 Feb 74) 2. this
is actually part of a chain of incidents which the individual uses
to invite sympathy or cooperation on the part of the environ-
ment. One uses engrams to handle himself and others and the
environment after one has himself conceived that he has failed
to handle himself, others and the general environment. (AP&A,
p. 7) 3. it is simply a time when you tried to do something and
were hurt or failed and got sympathy for it. Then afterwards
when you were hurt or failed and wanted an explanation, you
used it. And if you didn’t succeed in getting sympathy for it, you
used it so hard it became a psychosomatic illness. (HFP, p. 89)
4. every time you fail, you pick up this facsimile and become sick
or sadly noble. It’s your explanation to yourself and the world as

384
SETUP PROGRAM

to how and why you failed. It once got you sympathy. (HFP,
p. 89) 5. that facsimile which the preclear uses to apologize for
his failures. In other words, it is used to make others wrong and
procure their cooperation in the survival of the preclear. If the
preciear well cannot achieve survival, he attempts an illness or
disability as a survival computation. The workability and
necessity of the service facsimile is only superficially useful. The
service facsimile is an action method of withdrawing from a
state of beingness to a state of not beingness and is intended to
persuade others to coax the individual back into a state of
beingness. (AP&A, p. 43) 6. that computation generated by the
preclear (not the bank) to make self right and others wrong, to
dominate or escape domination and enhance own survival and
injure that of others. (HCOB 1 Sept 63)

SESSION, see AUDITING SESSION.

SESSION ARC BREAK, occurs when the session inadvertently
brought into view someplace on the back track, something which
was not acknowledged. A heavy charge on the back track moved
in just to the fringes of consciousness of the pc and he reacted,
and his affinity, and reality, and communication went by the
boards. (SH Spec 60, 6505C11)

SESSION MISSED WITHHOLD, a missed withhold picked up in
a session is anything the pc thinks, anything the pc is with-
holding. It doesn’t matter. That’s a session missed withhold. Pc
didn’t tell the auditor he was uncomfortable, etc. (SH Spec 142,
6205C03)

SETTLE OUT, 1. which is to say, permits the temporarily
enturbulated theta to disenturbulate and the “frozen” entheta to
convert, in some minute quantity, to free theta. (SOS, Bk. 2, p.
8) 2. destimulate. (HCOB 16 Aug 70)

SET UP, getting an F/N showing and VGIs before starting any
major action. Such may require a repair action and rudiments as
well. (HCOB 23 Aug 71)

SETUP PROGRAM, a repair program to eradicate case
mishandling by current life or auditing errors. (HCOB 12 Jun 70)

385
SEVEN RESISTIVE CASES

SEVEN RESISTIVE CASES, these are the only cases which hang
up: (1) unaudited cases (lies about grades, etc.); (2) drug cases
(who seek in processing the delusions or madness which exhil-
arated them on drugs); (3) former therapy cases (in this or past
lives); (4) out of valence cases; (5) cases who continue to commit
overts on Sen; (6) cases “audited” with their ruds out or grades
out; (7) seriously physically ill eases (where the illness makes too
much PTP in PT). (HCOB 23 Sept 68)

SEVEN SPECIAL CASES, Seven Resistive Cases. (HCOB 8 Sept
71)

SEVENTH DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.

SEVENTY-FIVE RATING, 75 rating. Passing grade 75 per cent
on simple written examination of which true and false questions
can comprise 75 per cent or more of the questions asked. (HCO
PL 15 Mar 63)

SEVERITY, an increase in that discipline believed necessary by
the people to guarantee their security. (PAB 96)

SEX, 1. the body’s single effort to make something out of nothing
is resident in sex, and in this culture at our time sex is a
degraded and nasty thing which must be hidden at best and
babies are something not to have but to be prevented. Thus
even sex has been made to parallel the something-into-nothing
impulse. (PAB 14) 2. sex has been overweighted in importance
in old psychotherapy, an importance more or less disgraced at
this time. Sex is only one of numerous creative impulses. An
anxiety about sex, however, occurs when an individual begins to
believe that there will not be a body for him to have during the
next lifetime. (FOT, p. 67) 3. sex finds no space tolerable for
present beingness but looks to other and future beingnesses as
the only chance for universes. (PAB 33) 4. a harmonic of
aesthetics and pain. (Scn Jour 18-G) 5. an interchange of
condensed admiration particles which forwards new bodies into
being. (COHA, p. 205) 6. the super-condensed many times via'd
activity of creating other life forms. The only thing which makes
it more complex is the fact that it is considered to be more
complex. (5410CM20)

386
SHORT SPOTTING

SEXUAL SENSATION, any feeling, pleasant or unpleasant,
commonly experienced during sexual restimulation or action.
(HCOB 19 Jan 67)

SF, small fall, (a quarter to half an inch). (HCOB 29 Apr 69)
SH, Saint Hill. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
SH ACC, Saint Hill Advanced Clinical Course. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

SHAME, 1. effect one creates is unworthy, shouldn’t have done it.
(HCOB 6 Feb 60) 2. being other bodies, that’s shame. There is
an emotion of shame connected with being other bodies; one is
ashamed to be oneself, he is somebody else. (5904C08)

SH DEMO, Saint Hill Demonstration. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

SHIFT OF VALENCE, that merely means taking on the identity
of another mass. (5410CM12)

SHOCK, 1. a person can be broken down on the emotional scale so
steeply, sharply and suddenly that they can be killed. That’s
what’s known as shock. (5203CM05A) 2. an expression of an
unwillingness to duplicate. (5410CM21)

SHORT 8, a short form of Standard Operating Procedure 8 of
Sen 8-8008. (COHA, p. 248)

SHORT LIST, by short, we don’t mean 539 pages, or three items
either. A short list is enough items to get the pc sure he or she
has covered the lot. (HCOB 1 Jul 65)

SHORT SESSIONING, 1. starting, continuing for a few minutes,
a session, and ending the session. It has good gain qualities for a
pe who has poor concentration. (HCOB 24 Mar 60) 2. means that
two or more sessions can be run in one auditing period. (HCOB
21 Dec 61)

SHORT SPOTTING, 1. one version of TR-10, “You notice that
(nearby object).” It is spotting right up close. (SCP, p. 10) 2. a
process called short spotting, wherein the auditor has the
preclear spot things that are very close to him. (SCP, p. 22)

387
SHORT TERM PTP

SHORT TERM P'TP, is in terms of months or weeks. (SH Spec 5,
6106C01)

SHPA, Special Hubbard Professional Auditors Course (London).
(HCOB 29 Sept 66)

SHSBC, 1. Saint Hill Special Briefing Course. (HCO PL 11 Feb 63)
2. the purpose of the Saint Hill Special Briefing Course was first
foremost and only to make clearing auditors. (HCO PL 12 Nov .
62)

SHUT-OFFS, there is a whole species of commands which shut off
pain and emotion simultaneously. “I can’t feel anything” is the
standard, but the command varies widely and is worded in a
great many ways. (DMSMG, p. 347)

SICK BEING, one who has been bent upon violence and was
suppressed, or one who was bent upon constructiveness and was
suppressed. (HCO Info Ltr 2 Apr 64)

SICKNESS, 1. the result of engram chains in restimulation.
(HCOB 16 Aug 69) 2. is a covert effort to die. (SH Spec 40,
6108C16) 3. invalidation of a terminal. (SH Spec 46, 6108C29)

SIGHT, light waves, coming from the sun, moon, stars or artificial
sources, reflect from objects and the light waves enter the eyes
and are recorded for present time action or as memory for
future reference. Light sources are also recorded. This is the
sense perception called sight. (SA, p. 79)

SIGNIFICANCE, 1. a word which is used in the special sense to
denote any thought, decision, concept, idea or meaning in the
mind in distinction to its masses. (The mind is basically
composed of masses and significances.) (Scn AD) 2. a thetan can
postulate or say or reason anything. Thus there is an infinity of
significances. (HCOB 16 Jun 70)

SIGNIFICANCE PROCESSING, significance processing had the
preclear take some picture or object and assign innumerable
significances to it. This is an excellent process for those who are
always looking for deeper significances in everything. (COHA,
p. 79)

388
SLANT (/)

SIMULATED CLEAR, we called it a “keyed-out clear” quite
properly. The person has been released from his reactive mind.
He still has that reactive mind but he’s not im it. (HCOB 2 Apr
65)

SINCE MID RUDS, see BIG MIDDLE RUDIMENTS, MIDDLE
RUDIMENTS.

SINGLE, by “single” is meant “to self” flow 1. (HCOB 5 Oct 69)

SIX BASIC PROCESSES, THE, (1) Two-Way Communication; (2)
Elementary Straightwire; (3) Opening Procedure of 8C; (4)
Opening Procedure by Duplication; (5) Remedying Havingness;
(6) Spotting Spots in Space. (PAB 42)

SIX LEVELS OF PROCESSING, 1. level one—rudiments, level
two—locational and not-know processes, level three—decisional
processing, level four—opening procedure by duplication, level
five—remedy of communication scarcity, level six—remedy of
havingness and spotting spots in space. (Scn 8-8008, p. 187) 2. a
method of auditing and a new auditing atmosphere which
articulates the attitude best calculated to maintain continuing
stable data in a case. The auditing atmosphere is A-R-C with
gain marked by continuing rises in ARC. (Sen 8-8008, pp. 137-141)

SIXTH DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.

SKIPPED GRADIENT, a skipped gradient means taking on a
higher degree or amount before a lesser degree of it has been
handled, one has to go back and handle the missed degree or
thing or else one will have just loses on a subject thereafter.
(HCOB 2 Jun 71 I)

SKUNK, “skunk” has a slang definition of “to lose out,” to be
“skunked.” (LRH Def. Notes)

SKUNKED, a list with RSes on it in listing that failed to produce
a reliable item. (HCOB 5 Dec 62)

SLAM, see ROCK SLAM.

SLANT (/), 1. if the item is alive constantly or sporadically but
doesn’t go null for three consecutive reads you put a slant. (SH
Spec 137, 6204C24) 2. the auditor, to null the list marks each
item that stays in with a (/). (HCOB 5 Dec 62)

389
SLAVERY

SLAVERY, being positioned in another’s time and space. (Sen
8-8008 Gloss)

SLOW ASSESSMENT, by slow assessment is meant letting the
pe itsa while assessing. This consists of rapid auditor action,
very crisp to get something that moves the TA and then
immediate shift into letting the pc itsa during which, “Be quiet!”
The slowness is overall action. It takes hours and hours to do an
old preclear assessment form this way but the TA flies. (HCOB
1 Oct 63)

SLOW BOAT AUDITING, auditing done without an ability to
estimate the ARC of the pe or know where the basic processes
fit on the tone scale. (Abil Ma 5)

SLOW GAIN CASE, committing overts the auditor doesn’t see.
Therefore a little discipline in the environment speeds the slow
gain case. (HCOB 29 Sept 65)

SLP, Six Levels of Processing. (Scn 8-8008, p. 187)

S.L.R., Scientology Library and Research Ltd. (HCO PL 30 Sept
64)

S.M., straight memory. (Hubbard Chart of Human Evaluation)

SMALL TIGER, it is however simply called Tiger Drill. Big Tiger
is always called Big Tiger. Only the following buttons are used
in Small Tiger: suppressed, invalidated, suggested, failed to
reveal and mistake. (HCOB 29 Nov 62)

SMC, State of Man Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

SMELL, is evidently activated by small particles escaping from
the object, which is thus sensed traveling through space and
meeting the nerves. Taste is usually considered to be a part of
the sense of smell. (SA, p. 87)

SNAPPING TERMINALS, the reason an engram comes into
being and expresses itself on a preclear’s body is a lack of
communication, the communication has become solid. It
expresses itself as an engram, as a facsimile, as a lock, as a
secondary. This expression comes about through absence of
two-way communication. The moment that one runs two-way

390
SOLIDITY

communication in upon the process, the spot has a tendency to
go back to its original location. This is the phenomenon known
as snapping or closing terminals. (PAB 51)

S.0., Sea Organization. (FO 508)

SOCIAL COUNSELOR COURSE, the course covers the basic
materials of Dn and Sen and teaches the student how to audit.
(SO ED 185, INT, 18 Jan 72)

SOCIAL MACHINERY, action without awareness. He’s doing it
all the time but he never noticed it. What the individual is aware
of and what the individual is doing are not the same thing, ever.
(Aud $1)

SOCIAL PERSONALITY, the social personality naturally
operates on the basis of the greatest good. He is not haunted by
imagined enemies but he does recognize real enemies when they
exist. The social personality wants to survive and wants others
to survive. Basically the social personality wants others to be
happy and do well. (JSE, p. 19)

SOFT TRs, there has been such a thing as “soft TRs”. In being
“soft” and “nice” about TRs, you are not doing anyone a favor. If
anything, it would be the greatest disservice you could give a
being. In Scn we get results and we get them by following our
technology relentlessly to the letter. (BTB 18 Aug 71R)

SOLDERED-IN, the engram acts as if it were a soldered-in
connection to the life function regulator and the organic coordi-
nator and the basic level of the analytical mind itself. By
soldered-in is meant “permanent connection.” This keying in is
the hook-up of the engram as part of the operating machinery of
the body. (DMSMG, p. 78)

SOLID, when the meter needle is not floating the TA is
registering mass, mental mass. When you see a TA going up,
up, up you know the picture isn’t erasing but is getting more
solid. The solidness is visible right on the TA dial. (HCOB 25
May 69)

SOLIDITY, 1. could be said to be stupidity. (COHA, p. 139) 2.
barriers. (HCOB 10 Mar 70)

391
SOLNS

SOLNS, solutions. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

SOLO AUDITING, 1. the action of “solo auditing” is not self-
auditing. Solo auditing is done in a regular session in model
session form. (HCOB 8 Dec 64) 2. in solo auditing the auditor is
also the pc. This means that once the auditor has duplicated and
understood the item or question the pc has also. (BTB 12 Dec
71 IV)

SOLUTION, 1. what will cause the problem to dissipate and
disappear. (PXL, p. 182) 2. something which solves the problem.
Thus the as-isness is the problem is the solution for it would
vanish the problem. (COHA, p. 109)

SOM, symbol for somatic. (HCOB 19 Jan 67)
SOMA, body. (HCOB 23 Apr 69)

SOMATIC, 1. by somatic is meant a pain or ache sensation and
also misemotion or even unconsciousness. There are a thousand
different descriptive words that could add up to a feeling. Pains,
aches, dizziness, sadness—these are all feelings. Awareness,
pleasant or unpleasant, of a body. ( HCOB 26 Apr 69) 2. body
sensation, illness or pain or discomfort. “Soma” means body.
Hence psychosomatic or pains stemming from the mind. (HCOB
23 Apr 69) 3. this is a general word for uncomfortable physical
perceptions coming from the reactive mind. Its genus is early
Dn and it is a general, common package word used by
Scientologists to denote “pain” or “sensation” with no difference
made between them. To the Scientologist anything is a somatic
if it emanates from the various parts of the reactive mind and
produces an awareness of reactivity. Symbol: SOM. (HCOB 8
Nov 62) 4. the word somatic means, actually, bodily or physical.
Because the word pain is restimulative, and because the word
pain has in the past led to a confusion between physical pain and
mental pain, the word somatic is used in Dn to denote physical
pain or discomfort, of any kind. It can mean actual pain, such as
that caused by a cut or a blow; or it can mean discomfort, as
from heat or cold; it can mean itching—in short, anything
physically uncomfortable. It does not include mental discomfort
such as grief. Hard breathing would not be a somatic; it would

392
SOMATIC STRIP

be a symptom of misemotion suppression. Somatic means a
non-survival physical state of being. (SOS, p. 79)

SOMATIC CHAIN, 1. chains, held together by somatics. The
body condition or somatic is what keeps the chain in associa-
tion. Somatic chains go quickly to basic and are the important
chains. (HCOB 23 May 69)

SOMATIC LOCATION, the technique available to the auditor by
which the moment of reception of the somatic is located, in an
effort to discover whether it is received in this engram or to find
an engram containing it. (DMSMH, p. 226)

SOMATIC MIND, 1. the mind that works in a purely stimulus
response way, contains only actingness, no thinkingness, and
can be used to set up certain physical machines. (HCO Info Ltr 2
Sept 64) 2. that mind which, directed by the analytical or
reactive mind, places solutions into effect on the physical level.
(Sen 0-8, p. 65) 3. this is an even heavier type of mind than the
reactive mind since it contains no thinkingness and contains only
actingness. The impulses placed against the body by the thetan
through various mental machinery, arrive at the voluntary,
involuntary, and glandular levels. These have set methods of
analysis for any given situation and so respond directly to
commands given. (FOT, p. 61) 4. the somatic mind would be that
mind which takes care of the automatic mechanisms of the body,
the regulation of the minutiae which keep the organism running.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 233)

SOMATIC SHUT-OFF, the somatic may be shut-off in the
incident or elsewhere, either earlier by command or late by
painful emotion. The patient who wriggles a great deal or who
does not wriggle at all is suffering from a pain or emotion
shut-off or late painful emotional engrams or both. There is a
whole species of commands which shut-off pain and emotion
simultaniously: this is because the word “feel” is homonymic. “I
can’t fee] anything” is the standard, but the command varies
widely and is worded in a great many ways. (DMSMG, pp.
346-347)

SOMATIC STRIP, the somatic strip is so called because it seems
to be a physical indicator mechanism which has to do with time.

393
SONIC

The auditor orders the somatic strip. There is this difference
between the file clerk and the somatic strip: he works with the
file clerk but commands the somatic strip. On command, the
somatic strip will go to any point of the preclear’s life, unless the
entheta on the case is so heavy that the somatic strip is frozen in
one place. The somatic strip goes to the point of return, but it is
not the same as completely returning since the preclear’s “I” can
stay in present time and the somatic strip can be sent back to
earlier periods of his life. This is a very useful mechanism. The
somatic strip can be sent back to the beginning of an engram
and will go there. The somatic strip will advance through an
engram in terms of minutes counted off by the auditor, so that
the auditor can say that the somatic strip will go to the
beginning of the engram, then to the point five minutes after the
engram began, and so forth. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 163)

SONIC, 1. ability to hear the sound in pictures. (HCOB 20 May 69)
2. by the word sonic in Dn is usually meant sonic recall, rather
than hearing sounds outside the body. Sonic means hearing the
sounds which have been remembered. Those sounds which the
individual has heard in the past are all recorded, either in the
analytical standard memory bank or in the reactive bank. (SOS,
p. 65) 3. recalling a sound by hearing it again is called “sonic” in
Dn and is a desirable circumstance which can be returned to the
individual. (SA, p. 85)

SONIC CIRCUITS, are very easily recognized, for they speak
audibly inside the head of the preclear or give him faint sonic
impressions. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 205)

SONIC SHUT-OFF, 1. it’s a person trying to stop the energy
wave of sound. (5110CM01B) 2. sonic shut-off may be quite
selective: the individual may be able to hear sounds but not
voices. Selective shut-offs are caused both by charge on the case
and by selective sonic shut-off commands, such as “You cannot
hear your wife,” or “You pay no attention to me.” (SOS, p. 66)

SOP, Standard Operating Procedure. (Scn 8-8008, p. 85)

SOP-8, Standard Operating Procedure 8. This operating proce-
dure retains the most workable methods of preceding proce-
dures and, in itself, emphasizes positive gain and the present

394
SOURCE

and future rather than negative gain of eradication of the past.
The goal of this procedure is not the rehabilitation of the body but
of the thetan. Rehabilitation of a body incidentally ensues. The
goal of this procedure is Operating Thetan. (Sen 8-8008, p. 115)

SOP 8A, a process; employed the moment it is discovered the pc's
very uncertain of his own mock-ups or if he is occluded. (PAB 2)

SOP-8-C, might be called SOP-8 modified for clinical, laboratory,
and individual human applications. The goal of the system of
operation is to return to the individual his knowledge, skill and
knowingness, and to enhance his perception, his reaction time
and serenity. (COHA, p. 246)

SOP 8-D, this procedure is for use by a trained Scientologist. Its
primary goal is the delivery of heavy cases; however it can be
extensively applied to all cases. (COHA, p. 174)

SOP GOALS, this is Standard Operating Procedure Goals. There
is a great deal to know about SOP Goals. It is the right way to
use the pre-hav scales. With skilled use this can produce
releases and Clears. (HCOB 23 Mar 61)

SOUND, 1. sound consists of the perception of waves emanating
from moving objects. An object moves rapidly or slowly, and
sets into vibration the air in its vicinity which pulses. When
these pulses strike the eardrum they set into motion the
individual’s sound recording mechanism and the sound is reg-
istered. Sound is absent in a vacuum and is actually merely a
force wave. (SA, p. 84) 2. sound is a by-product of communica-
tion. It is the carrier wave of communication and is not itself
communication. (Dn 55/, p. 181) 3. sound has several parts. The
first is pitch. This is the number of vibrations per unit of time of
any object from which sound is coming. The second is quality or
tone which is simply the difference between a jagged or ragged
sound wave and a smooth sound wave as in a musical note. The
third is volume, which merely means the force of the sound
wave, its loudness or quietness. (SA, p. 85)

SOURCE, 1. the point of origin, or it would be the originator, or
where something was begun or dreamed up or mocked up.
(Class VIII, No. 18) 2. that from which something comes or
develops; place of origin: cause. (HCOB 11 May 65)

395
SOURCE LIST

SOURCE LIST, 1. the goal oppose as covered in steps 1-7 (of
R8M). This is called a “source list.” (HCOB 22 Feb 63)
2. there are only two of these “source lists.” (a) the “most likely
list” at the start of each GPM, done before RIs are found. “Who
or what would be most likely to achieve this goal?” And (b) the
“goal as an RI oppose list” at the bottom of the GPM, done after
all the RIs of the GPM are found. “What goal would (the goal
just done) oppose?” (HCOB 8 Apr 63)

SOURCE-POINT, if you consider a river flowing to the sea, the
place where it began would be the source-point or cause and the
place where it went into the sea would be the effect-point and
the sea would be the effect of the river. (PAB 86)

ZY

SOUTH, very, very rough cases. The common denominator is:
nothing they think has any effect on anything. They're all on
automatic and what they’ve got left under analytical control is so
scrappily tiny that it’s a wonder they move at all. (6102C14) See
ALL THE WAY SOUTH.

SOUTH OF THE AUKS, “South” is used as “below” or more basic
or “more lost.” South of the AUKS would be even further south
than the South Pole, Antartica being inhabited by a flightless
bird, the AUK. (LRH Def. Notes)

SP, suppressive person. (HCOB 5 Feb 66)

SPACATION, 1. the subject of space. We call the process
spacation, and spacation would be the subject of space. (PDC 1)
2. a process having to do with the rehabilitation of the creation

396
SPACE

of space. (PDC 1) 3. constructing own space with eight anchor
points and holding it stable without effort. (Scn 8-8008, pp.
116-117) 4. the subject of the creation, handling of, or concept of
space. (PDC 11)

SPACE, 1. space is a viewpoint of dimension. It doesn’t exist
without a viewpoint. (5311CM17A) 2. space is not nothingness.
Space is the viewpoint of dimension, and that is what space is. It
is how far we look and if you didn’t look you wouldn't have any
space. (5608C00) 3. space is caused by looking out from a point.
The only actuality of space is the agreed-upon consideration that
one perceives through something and this we call space. (FO7,
p. 71) 4. space is made by the attitude of a viewpoint which
demarks an area with anchor points. (Sen 8-8008, p. 17) 5. can
be defined of course in reverse by its own terms in terms of
time. Space is something that to go from the left side of the
table over to the right side of the tabletop would require space.
They define against each other (time and space). (5203C03B)

Space

397
SPACE OPERA

SPACE OPERA, a novel, motion picture, radio or television play,
or comic strip usually of a stock type featuring interplanetary
travel, beings of outer space often in conflict with the people of
earth and other similar science fiction themes. (Websters Third
International Dictionary)

SPECTRUM, gradations of something which are really the same
thing but which have wider and wider scope or range.
(DMSMG, p. 196)

SPECTRUM PRINCIPLE, a yardstick whereby gradations from
zero to infinity and infinity to infinity were used and absolutes
were considered utterly unobtainable for scientific purposes.
(DMSMH, p. 336)

SPEECH, 1. a specialized portion of sound and sight. Speech is
learned by the mimicry of the sounds of action. (NOTL, p. 39)
2. a symbolized package of perception. (Spr Lect 3, 5303M24)

SPERM DREAM, patients sometimes have a feeling that they are
sperms or ovums at the beginning of the track; in Dn this is
called the sperm dream. (DMSMBH, p. 294)

SPHERES OF INTEREST, the spheres of interest are the eight
dynamics. A series of concentric spheres each one larger than
the last with the first dynamic at center and the eighth dynamic
at the extreme of any universe gives a spatial picture of
interest. (COHA, p. 99)

SPINNER, THE, a chair device was used to spin the thetan until
he had no orientation. This is the probable source of the slang
term, spinning, meaning going insane. (HOM, pp. 72-73)

SPINNINESS, a variety of dizziness; a sensation. (HCOB 19 Jan
67)

SPINNING, slang term meaning going insane. (HOM, p. 78)

SPIRALS, 1. the thetan lives his life in segments: the largest
segment is composed of spirals, as he goes through the mest
universe, he is involved in a series of spirals each one less in
terms of years, ordinarily, than the last. The length of this
spiral might serve to indicate how much longer the thetan can

398
SQUIRRELLING

continue. By a spiral would be meant a more or less continuous
cycle of action. (HOM, p. 50) 2. a term of lives, or a term of
existences, or a single existence which bear an intimate relation,
one to the other. (PDC 16)

SPIRIT, a thetan, after the Greek symbol of thought (©) and
spirit—theta. (Abd 146)

SPORADIC SLAM, this slam is occasionally turned on. (SH Spec
194, 6209C25)

SPOT, a simple location, not a spot that has a mass, temperature,
or characteristics. A location is simply a location, it does not
have mass, it does not have color, it does not have any
temperature. (Dn 55!/, p. 119)

SPOTTING SPOTS, 1. the goal of the process is to bring the
preclear to a point where he can spot locations in space which do
not have color, mass or shape, but which are simply locations,
and spot that same location repeatedly without variation. (PAB
51) 2. this is a precision action—you want him to spot a spot in
space and then be able to spot it again. That spot is only a
location. It doesn’t have mass, and you want him to be able to
put his finger on it and take his finger off of it, and put the
finger of his other hand on it, and take it off, and move his body
into it and move his body out of it and so forth. This is a location
and the more certain he becomes of these locations the better he
is, and the next thing you know—why, he’s able to tolerate
space. (PXZ, p. 262)

SPRINGY, needle reaction—reads which bounce back to set
position. (HCOB 8 Jul 64 IT)

SPR LECT, London Spring Lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

SQUIRREL, 1. a squirrel is doing something entirely different.
He doesn’t understand any of the principles so he makes up a
bunch of them to fulfill his ignorance and voices them off on a pe
and gets no place. (SH Spec 77, 6111C08) 2. those who engage in
actions altering Sen, and ofbeat practices. (ISE, p. 40) —v. to
change and invent processes. (HCOB 23 May 69)

SQUIRRELLING, 1. it means altering Sen and offbeat practices.
It is a bad thing. (HCO PL 14 Feb 65) 2. squirrelling is not really
different processes— it is careless, incomplete, messed up audit-
ing procedure. (HCOB 15 Jan 70 II)

399
SRI

SRI, Student Rescue Intensive. (BTB 9 Aug 70R)
SSSA, six steps for self auditing. (PAB 7)

STABILITY, what we will call a stability for want of a better
word at this time would be one who can, without the assistance
of mest eyes, perceive with complete certainty the three
universes from many viewpoints, a Clear. (PAB 2)

STABLE DATUM, 1. until one selects one datum, one factor, one
particular in a confusion of particles, the confusion continues.
The one thing selected and used becomes the stable datum for
the remainder. (POW, p. 23) 2. any body of knowledge is built
from one datum. That is its stable datum. Invalidate it and the
entire body of knowledge falls apart. A stable datum does not
have to be the correct one. It is simply the one that keeps things
from being in a confusion and on which others are aligned.
(POW, p. 24) 3. a datum which keeps things from being in a
confusion and around which other data align. (NSOL, p. 66) See
also DOCTRINE OF THE STABLE DATUM.

STAFF STAFF AUDITOR, 1. purpose: to keep staff morale high,
by keeping missed withholds cleaned up. To see to it that staff
gets best auditing possible. To release and clear staff. (HCO PL
17 May 62) 2. audits staff members, handles auditing emergency
assists on staff. (HCO PL 18 Dec 64)

STAGE FOUR NEEDLE, 1. means somebody who isn’t register-
ing by reason of being stuck in machinery. A stage four needle
rises and sticks and then falls. (5811007) 2. this is the sole
survivor of an old system (20th ACC) that used four stages of
meter reaction as a test of state of case. A stage four needle is
still important to identify when met as it means this preclear is
from no place as a case. A stage four is below a merely stuck
needle. A stage four needle goes up about an inch or two
(always the same distance) and sticks and then falls, goes up,
sticks, falls, about once a second or so. It is very regular, always
the same distance, always the same pattern, over and over on
and on, and nothing you say or the preclear says changes it
(except body reactions). It’s a disheartening phenomenon. Until
you break it, there’s no case change. (EME, p. 19)

400
STAGES OF RELEASE

STAGES OF RELEASE, First Stage Release. 1. this occurs in
auditing up to Grade IV. It is not very stable. The person is
very well off and definitely a release, but he or she can now
postulate and in postulating sometimes gets into the R6 bank.
The first stage release is eased out of the bank but subject to
call back. (HCOB 28 Jun 65) 2. to obtain first stage release, one
must have had lower grade auditing of some sort. This removes
the locks (the distressful moments of life) off the reactive mind.
As these pinned one to it, one can now get out of it. (HCOB 5
Aug 65)

Second Stage Release. Power Process Release. This is very
stable and should be called a Second Stage Release or a Power
Release to be technically exact. You can run only power
processes on a First Stage Release. These knock out all factors
of the track that force a person back into the R6 bank and leave
the person able to go into or get out of the R6 bank easily. This
second stage release is definitely Homo novis. The person ceases
to respond like a Homo sapiens and has fantastic capability to
learn and act. (HCOB 28 Jun 65)

Third Stage Release. 1. certain advanced power processes make
a Third Stage Release. These mainly recover knowledge and
smooth out one’s understanding of the awareness of the environ-
ment achieved by Second Stage Release on power processing.
(HCOB 12 Jul 65) 2. (called for a few days a second stage before
terminology was firm) is an improved Second Stage Release in
that selective areas of learning are handled to return special
skills to the person. The case state does not necessarily improve
but certain zones of knowledge have been polished up. (HCOB
28 Jun 65)

Fourth Stage Release. to obtain Fourth Stage Release one has
to take the lock end words off the R6 bank. He has to be an R6
auditor himself to do this properly. With these gone, the R6
bank is left on its naked basics and one can be very free of it for
quite a while. (HCOB 5 Aug 65)

Fifth Stage Release. 1. to obtain a Fifth Stage Release, one has
to have run out the whole remaining reactive mind. That’s done
by a process known as R6-GPMI or GPM’s by Items (HCOB 5
Aug 65) 2. Fifth Stage Release would be Clear. (SH Spec 65,
6507C27)

401
STALE-DATED C/S

STALE-DATED C/S, a C/S that is a week or two old. This is
called a stale-dated C/S meaning it is too old to be valid. (HCOB
23 Aug 71)

STALE-DATED PROGRAM, a repair (progress) program that is
a month or two old. This is called a stale-dated program
meaning it is too old to be valid. (HCOB 23 Aug 71)

STANDARD, 1. a definite level or degree of quality that is proper
and adequate for a specific purpose. (Class VIII, No. 4) 2. “Stan-
dard” in standard tech auditing is a precise activity, done
with good TRs, exact grade processes and exact actions. (HCOB
10 Sept 68)

STANDARD AUDITING CYCLE, a standard auditing cycle
includes only those items which appear on the paid completions
HCOB 30 Aug 71RA Issue II, Revised 21 Oct 73, Paid Comple-
tions —Second Revision. (HCO PL 21 Oct 73R)

STANDARD DIANETICS, modern Dn auditing is called Standard
Dianetics and new Dianeties. It is a precision activity. (LRH ED
9, 11 May 69)

STANDARD MEMORY BANKS, 1. the analytical mind has its
standard memory banks. To operate, the analytical mind has to
have percepts (data), memory (data), and imagination (data).
Whether or not the data contained in the standard memory
banks is evaluated correctly or not, it is all there. The various
senses receive information and this information files straight
into the standard memory bank. (DMSMH, p. 45) 2. those in
which experience is stored for use in the estimation of the effort
necessary for survival and are concerned with analytical
thought. (Sen 8-8008, p. 8) 3. recordings of everything perceived
throughout the lifetime up to present time by the individual
except physical pain, which is not recorded in the analytical
mind but is recorded in the reactive mind. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 230)

STANDARD PATTERN OF A TRACK, the standard pattern of a
track should be counter-effort, overt act, thought pattern.
(5206CM24F)

STANDARD TECH, 1. a standardization of processes so that they
apply to 100 per cent of the cases to which they are addressed.

402
STATE OF CASE SCALE

(Class VIII, No. 19) 2. the accumulation of those exact processes
which make a way between humanoid and OT, the exact method
of organizing them, the exact method of delivering them, and
the exact repair of any errors made on that route. (Class VIII,
No. 2) 3. that terribly narrow path which we now call standard
tech is composed of those things which if they are out inhibit and
prohibit all case gain. (Class VIII, No. 1) 4. standard tech is not
a process or a series of processes. It is following the rules of
processing. (HCOB 26 Feb 70) 5. that tech which has absolutely
no arbitraries. (HCOB 23 Aug 68)

STANDING WAVE, a wave form comes up and either because it
meets another wave form or for some other reason it just
becomes a rigid form. If you could imagine an ocean wave not
any longer rolling but just sitting there all peaked. Well,
electricity strangely enough will do this, and a thetan is very
good at this. (7204C07 SO III)

STARRATE CHECKOUT, a very exact checkout which verifies
the full and minute knowledge of the student, of a portion of
study materials and tests his full understanding of the data and
ability to apply it. (HCOB 21 Sept 70)

STAR-RATED, 100 per cent letter perfect in knowing and
understanding, demonstrating and being able to repeat back the
material with no comm lag. (HCO PL 8 Mar 66)

START-CHANGE-STOP, the anatomy of control. This is a cycle
of action. There is continue (persist) on the middle of the curve
and other cycles within cycles of action, but the most important
factors are start, change, and stop. These three parts of control
are run flat individually. Then pick up the other part of the cycle
and run that flat in this order: we run change flat, and then run
start very flat and then we run stop flat. (PAB 97)

STATE OF CASE SCALE, 1. this is the state of case scale. All
levels given are major levels. Minor levels exist between them.
Level (1), no track—no charge. Level (1) is of course an O.T.
(HCOB 8 Jun 63) Level (2), full visible time track—some charge.
Level (2) is the clearest clear anybody ever heard of. (HCOB 8
Jun 63) Level (3), sporadic visibility of track—some heavily
charged areas. Level (3) can run engrams. (HCOB 8 Jun 63)

403
STATES OF RELEASE

Level (4), invisible track (black or invisible field), very heavily
charged areas exist. Level (4) can run early track engrams if the
running is skilled. Level (4) includes the Black V case. (HCOB 8
Jun 63) Level (5), dub-in—some areas of track so heavily
charged pc is below consciousness in them. Level (5) has to be
run on general ARC processes. (HCOB 8 Jun 63) He has an
uncertainty about everything. He has to figure about every-
thing; he has to know before he goes, and he has to hide but he
knows he can’t hide, and he depends on logic to serve for all of
his predictions because he can’t look. (PAB 2) This guy can’t
confront it to the degree that if he tries to confront it he makes a
picture of it. He’s got a picture of a picture. (SH Spec 275,
6306C18) Level (6), dub-in of dub-in. Many areas of track so
heavily charged, the dub-in is submerged. Level (6) has to be
run carefully on special ARC processes with lots of havingness.
(HCOB 8 Jun 63) A (6) is neurotic. He’s unable to easily recall
the things in the next to the last list of Self Analysis; something
really real, a time he was really in communication, and so forth.
(53804M07) There’s nothing that distinguishes the (6) from the
dub-in case except the degree of franticness which the case goes
into, and the amount of delusion which can turn on. What
characterizes this case is the terrible automaticity of the bank.
(SH Spec 274, 6306C13) Level (7), only aware of own evaluations
—track too heavily charged to be viewed at all. Level (7)
responds to the CCHs. (HCOB 8 Jun 63) Level (8), unaware—pe
dull, often in a coma. Level (8) responds only to reach and
withdraw CCHs. (HCOB 8 Jun 63) In actuality on some portion
of every time track in every case you will find each of the levels
except (1) momentarily expressed. The above scale is devoted to
chronic case level and is useful in programming a case. Now,
what makes these levels of case? It is entirely charge. The more
heavily charged the case, the lower it falls on the above scale. It
is charge that prevents the pc from confronting the time track
and submerges the time track from view. (HCOB 8 Jun 68)

STATES OF RELEASE, there are five states of release (Grades
0-IV) up to Power Release (Grade V). Above this is a Whole
Track Release (Grade VI) and above that is a state we call Clear.
Clear is followed by the state of OT (Operating Thetan),
attained in sections. (Aud 107 ASHO)

404
STENOGRAPHIC AUDITING

STATIC, 1. a static is something without mass, without wave-
length, without time, and actually without position. That’s a
static and that is the definition of zero. (5410CMO06) 2. a static by
definition, is something that is in a complete equilibrium. It isn’t
moving and that’s why we've used the word static. Not in an
engineering sense but in its absolute dictionary sense. (5608C--)
3. an actuality of no mass, no wave-length, no position in space
or relation in time, but with the quality of creating or destroy-
ing mass or energy, locating itself or creating space, and of
re-relating time. (Dn 55!, p. 29) 4. something which has no
motion. The word is from the Latin, sto meaning stand. No part
of mest can be static, but theta is static. Theta has no motion.
Even when the mest it controls is moving in space and time,
theta is not moving, since theta is not in space or time. (Abil
114A) 5. has no motion, it has no width, length, breadth, depth;
it is not held in suspension by an equilibrium of forces; it does
not have mass; it does not contain wave-lengths; it has no
situation in time or space. (Sen 8-8008, p. 18) 6. the simplest
thing there is is a static, but a static is not nothingness. These
are not synonyms. We speak of it carelessly as a nothingness.
That’s because we say nothingness in relationship to the space
and objects of the material universe. Life has a quality. It has an
ability. When we say nothingness we simply mean it has no
quantity. There is no quantitative factor. (5411CM05) 7. a static,
in physics, is called something which is “an equilibrium of
forces.” (Dn 55!, p. 27)

STEERING THE PC, 1. this is the only use of latent or random
reads. You see a read the same as the instant read occurring
again when you are not speaking but after you have found a
whole thought reacting you say, “There” or “That” and the pe,
seeing what he or she is looking at as you say it recovers the
knowledge from the reactive bank and gives the data and the
whole thought clears or has to be further worked and cleared.
(HCOB 25 May 62) 2. each time the needle twitches the auditor
says, “That” or “There” to help the pe see what is twitching.
This prompting is the only use of latent reads in Sen. (HCOB 3
May 62)

STENOGRAPHIC AUDITING, the auditor is writing down every
word the pc says (like a stenographer). (BTB 10 Jul 69)

405
STEP V

STEP V, Black V. (PXL, p. 167) See also STATE OF CASE
SCALE.

STEP SIX, 1.1 had known about help for some years and in 1957,
autumn, used it with Step 6 in clearing people. The first clears
made easily by others were done with meter assessments and
five way help brackets on terminals. It was found that Step 6,
being a creative process, was bad on some cases. The clearing
formula was help and Step 6. (HCOB 12 May 60) 2. establish pe’s
control over mest subjective. (HCOB 13 Mar 75) [The full
rundown is contained in Scientology Clear Procedure, Issue
One. ]

STEP SIX PHENOMENON (OF SCIENTOLOGY CLEAR PRO-
CEDURE), when what you are asking the pc to do is at great
variance with the basic goal of the pc, you get an increase of
mass in the bank by reason of mocking things up. (SH Spec 160,
6206C12)

STEP 6 SOP-8C, that step which includes the solution of problems
posed by symbolism. The solution which resolves symbolism is
the definition of Step 6. (2ACC-11B, 5311CM27)

STHIL, Saint Hill. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

STICK, needle definitely stops (if it was moving) or simply
remains fixed with no movement in either direction. (HCOB 30
Apr 60)

STICKERS, they are stuck phrases in modifiers. “Stay right here
and wait no matter how long it takes.” That would not be
unusual to find in a modifier. It parks the person on the track
very effectively. (SH Spec 81, 6111C16)

STICKY NEEDLE (sticky or rigid needle), one which does not
change, but if it does, changes very slightly and with a jerk.
(Sen Jour 1-G 1952)

STICTUIVITY (STICK-TO-IVITY), Slang. the ability to stick to a
purpose, to keep on going. The ability to persist. (LRH Def.
Notes)

STILL TA, 1. occurs when the auditor did not have to move the
TA in order to read the needle. (SH Spec 234, 6302C07) 2. only

406
STRAIGHTWIRE

one-eighth of a division of motion on the tone arm dial—e.g., an
eighth of the distance from 4 to 5. (HCOB 11 Apr 61)

STIMULUS-RESPONSE, mechanism whereby the individual is
restimuated or upset or stimulated by the environment. (HFP,
p. 32)

STO, a Staff Training Officer (STO) is the head of the staff
training section of the Qualifications Division. (HCO PL 21 Sept
69)

STOP, 1. motionlessness. (SCP, p. 17) 2. a stop is made out of
vias. (COHA, p. 108)

STOPPED READ, would be one that froze the needle. (HCOB 3
Jun 71)

STOP SUPREME, a variation of S-C-S processes. Stop Supreme
is a heavy emphasis on stop and it will be found that after the
three processes of start, change and stop are flat, one can move
rather easily into Stop Supreme. The idea behind Stop Supreme
is that stop or motionlessness, is probably the most thetan
ability a thetan has. Thus the rehabilitation of this particular
ability is worthwhile and does produce considerable results.
(SCP, p. 17)

STP, Standard Procedure Lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
ST PTS, student points. (FBDL 279)

STRAIGHT LINE MEMORY, in straight line memory you don’t
put the preclear in reverie or let him close his eyes. It can cure a
person by remembering pleasant things in the past. You don’t
want him to remember only the concept, but to remember the
exact moment. (NOTL, p. 113)

STRAIGHT MEMORY, 1. the process of recovering data, spring-
ing locks by straight memory and setting up the case in such a
way that it'll go into reverie. It’s getting your earliest locks,
getting him to remember this and that and the bad things he
thinks about himself. (5011CM30) 2. straight wire. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 64)

STRAIGHTWIRE, 1. when we say straightwire, we're simply
talking about stringing a line from cause to effect through the
past. (5410CM07) 2. straight memory is also called straightwire
because the auditor is directing the memory of the preclear and

407
STRAY RI

in doing so is stringing wire, much on the order of a telephone
line, between “I” and the standard memory bank. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 64) 3. a technique of direct memory. (5009CM23B) 4. in 1950
in the early HDA lectures we described this as the act of
stringing a line between present time and some incident in the
past, and stringing that line directly and without any detours.
(Abid SW, p. 11) 5. straightwire is—the recovery of the actual,
time, place and object. (5410CM07)

STRAY RI, a stray RI is an RI from a GPM of another goal than
the one being worked. (HCOB 18 Mar 63)

STRESS ANALYSIS, using the E-meter to isolate the exact point
of a man’s difficulty with a subject or equipment and clearing
this up, or finding the exact point where equipment is not well
adapted to man. Its use in study can pin-point the exact thing
that has halted the flow of comprehension. Thus it can be
cleared up. (HCOB 13 Jun 70 II)

STRIPPING, the action of stripping is done by taking every
aspect of every factor in the problem and running it back to the
postulate the preclear made to be concerned about that aspect of
the factor. (AP&A, p. 46)

STUCK FLOW, 1. a flow which runs too long in one direction can
“stick.” It will not flow longer in that one direction. It now has
to have a reverse flow run. (HCOB 5 Oct 69) 2. one-way
communication. The flow can be stuck incoming or it can be
stuck outgoing. (Dn 55!, p. 79)

STUCK IN A WIN, a person is stuck in “wins” only when he
intended to lose and won. A runner never expected to win. He
was simply part of the field most of his career and then
spectacularly and almost by accident, he won. It is certain that
he will be stuck in that win. Therefore the only wins that a
person gets stuck in are those which were not intentional. (PAB
91)

STUCK IN PRESENT TIME, 1. the condition of a person being
incapable of moving on the time track into the past. In actuality
the preclear is in some incident which forces him to be in the
apparent present. (HCOB 11 May 65) 2. a person cannot be
stuck in present time. The engram might give him the illusion of
being stuck in present time, but actually he is stuck in an
engram. (NOTL, p. 127) 3. when a case is stuck in present time

408
STUDENT

it is highly charged with occluded emotion and it is obeying a
restimulated engram to the effect that it must go all the way to
now and stay there. (DMSMH, p. 285)

STUCK IN THE PAST, one holds onto things in the past on the
postulate that they must not happen in the future. This sticks
the person in the past. (PAB 17)

STUCK NEEDLE, 1. in a totally stuck needle the preclear would
not even register being pinched. It looks stiff. (EME, p. 14)
2. you ask the pc a question and the needle just stays stuck with
no movement whatsoever. (BIEM, p. 40) 3. it simply means that
the fellow has flowed out or flowed in too long in one direction.
(5207CM24B)

STUCK ON THE TRACK, 1. a phenomenon where a person can
believe himself to be at some distant point in the past. (Dn 55),
p. 15) 2, that means he’s got too much energy in one lump about
something that he has nothing further to do with. (PDC 54)
3. the anatomy of being stuck on the track is “this part of the
track must not duplicate, and I must stay here to make sure that
it doesn’t.” (2ACC-24A, 5312CM15)

STUCK PICTURE, is when a pc can’t audit the chain he should be
on because the picture keeps coming in. (HCOB 13 May 69)

Student

STUDENT, a student is one who studies. He is an attentive and
systematic observer. A student is one who reads in detail in
order to learn and then apply. As a student studies he knows
that his purpose is to understand the materials he is studying by
reading, observing, and demonstrating so as to apply them to a
specific result. He connects what he is studying to what he will
be doing. (BTB 26 Oct 70 II)

409
STUDENT ADMIN

STUDENT ADMIN, 1. the Administrator’s function of service to
students is important, he must see the data on the course being
held is available and in sufficient quantity and quality. (HCO PL
11 May 69) 2. gives flawless service to students and classrooms
so that there is never a stop on student or classroom functions.
(HCO PL 14 Oct 70)

STUDENT AUDITOR, a student enrolled on a course auditing as
stipulated on his checksheet for course requirements. (HCO PL
4 Dee 71 V)

Student Auditor
—\
STUDENT CONSULTATION, the personal handling of student

problems or progress by a qualified consultant. (HCOB 19 Jun
71 III)

STUDENT FOLDER, the folder contains all of the routing forms
and attached invoices, all pink sheets issued to the student, all
essays the student has done on the checksheet, all written drills,
and the finished checksheet itself. (HCO PL 18 Jul 71 II)

STUDENT HAT, a course; the product of this course is a student
who has a good working knowledge of study tech, completion of
this checksheet does not entitle the student to superliterate
status which is granted only on full completion of Primary
Rundown or Primary Correction Rundown. (HCO PL 12 Apr
72RA-1 II)

STUDENT RESCUE INTENSIVE, 1. this is a speed up for study.
It is terribly effective providing always that the person's case is
in normal condition. (LRH ED 57 INT, 14 Dec 69) 2. a rundown
which came about when a supervisor found that engrams and

410
SUB-ITSA

secondaries gather around the subject of study and developed
some material on it which I tested and redeveloped. (HCOB 23
Nov 69R III)

STUDENTS’ RABBLE ROUSE LINE, this is the line on which
students can scream when there is an outness on their course
which is not being immediately corrected. (HCO PL 20 Nov 70
II)

STUDY, to apply the mind in order to acquire knowledge or skill.
(BTB 4 Mar 65R) ,

STUDY CORRECTION LIST, used to handle outnesses in a
person’s earlier studies which prevent him from progressing
well on current study or make him antipathetic towards study.
Done as part of the Primary Correction Rundown. It is not used
as a substitute for correct application of study tech on the
person’s current course. Assessed M5. EP is all reading items
fully handled and an F/Ning list on final assessment. The full EP
of pe willing and able to study well would require each step of
Primary Correction RD completed in sequence if pe had been
having study trouble. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)

STUDY STRESS ANALYSIS, see STRESS ANALYSIS.

STUPIDITY, 1. the mechanical definition of stupidity is the
unknownness of time, place, form and event. (5408CM20) 2. the
definition of stupidity is simply this—having lost the time, the
place, and the object. (AX-3, 5410CM07) 3. stupidity is the
unknowness of consideration. (PXL, p. 182)

82, “From where could you communicate to a victim?” (BTB 9 Oct
71RA II)

STYLE, a method or custom of performing actions. (HCOB 6 Nov
64)

SUB-APATHY, a state of disinterest, no affinity, no reality, no
communication. There will be social machinery, valences, cir-
cuits, etc., but the pe himself will not be there. (BTB 6 Feb 60)

SUB-ITSA, significances or masses so charged that the pc is
unable to locate, identify or describe them. They are below the

411
SUBJECTIVE

depth he is able to itsa to. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Scn VI Part One
Glossary of Terms)

SUBJECTIVE (a standard dictionary definition), “proceeding
from or taking place in an individual’s mind.” (HCOB 2 Nov
57RA)

SUBJECTIVE CONFRONT PROCESSES, subjective duplication
increase. (HCOB 29 Sept 60)

SUBJECTIVE DUB-IN, the manifestation of putting, unknow-
ingly, perceptions which do not in actual fact exist, into
incidents on the time track. (HCOB 11 May 65)

SUBJECTIVE ENVIRONMENT, is the environment the individ-
ual himself believes is there. (HFP, p. 153)

SUBJECTIVE HAVINGNESS, one way to run this is to ask the
preclear what he can mock up. Then have him mock up what he
can, and shove it into his body. That is the most elementary way
of running this. (PAB 154)

SUBJECTIVE PROCESSES, 1. processes which intimately ad-
dress the internal world of the preclear. (COHA, p. 166) 2. an
out of sight, in-his-own-mind process. (Dn 55!, p. 121) 3. consul-
tation with the preclear’s own universe, with his mock-ups, and
with his own thoughts and considerations. (COHA, p. 167) 4.
think processes. (HCOB 29 Oct 57) 5. recall, think, remember or
return on the time track processes are subjective. (HCOB 2 Nov
57RA)

SUBMIND, the reactive mind. (SOS, p. xii)

SUBVOLITIONAL, actions, decisions, choices and goals occurring
below the level at which the pe has any conscious control.
Inevitable activities. (HCOB 18 Apr 64, Sen VI Part One Glos-
sary of Terms)

SUB ZERO RELEASE, the Awareness Levels from the Gradation
Chart are assessed from the bottom -34 up. When the PC’s
awareness level is called the needle will float. This will be most
real to the PC and he will probably comment on it. The
Examiner stops at that instant, indicates the floating needle.
The examiner notifies the Auditor that a Sub Zero Release has
been obtained. (HCOB 2 Jan 67) See also MINUS SCALE
RELEASE.

412
SUPERSTITION

SUCCESS STORY, 1. means an originated written statement by
the pe. (HCO PL 29 Aug 71) 2. the statement of benefit or gains
or wins made by a student or a preclear or pre-OT to the success
officer or someone holding that post in an org. (HCOB 19 Jun 71
III) See also RAVE SUCCESS STORY.

SUCCUMB, 1. survive has its dichotomy, succumb. When one is
below 2.0 on the tone scale, all survival looks evil to him.
Live=evil in the succumbing case. (COHA, p. 147) 2. the point
marked by what one might call the death of the consciousness of
the individual. (SA, p. 22) 3. The failure to survive is to
succumb. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 31) 4. succumbing is the ultimate
penalty of non-survival activity. This is pain. Failures bring pain
and death. (SOS Gloss)

SUICIDE, suicides are assisted normally by engrams which
specifically demand suicide. But suicide is a natural manifesta-
tion, apparently, a fast means of separating theta and mest and
gaining death quickly. Suicide is always psychotic. (SOS, p. 28)

SUMMARY REPORT FORM, a report written by the auditor
after the session on a fill-in type standard form and is simply an
exact record of what happened and what was observed during
the session. (BTB 3 Nov 72R)

SUPER, 1. superiority in size, quality, number or degree. (Aud 77
ASHO) 2. supervisor. (HCO PL 16 Mar 71R)

SUPER-LITERATE, 1. the ability to comfortably and quickly
take data from a page and be able at once to apply it. (HCOB 7
Sept 74) 2. being a super-literate is like hearing and seeing and
reading for the first time. Reading a text or instruction or book
is comfortable. One has it in conceptual form. One can apply the
material learned. It is a new state. (HCOB 21 Jun 72 IV) 3.
super—superiority in size, quality, number or degree. Literacy —
the ability to read and write. What is really needed is the ability
to comfortably and quickly take data from a page and be able at
once to apply it. Anyone who could do that would be Super-
Literate. Super-Literacy is the end product of a Primary
Rundown or a Primary Correction Rundown. (HCOB 7 Sept 74)

SUPERSTITION, an effort, for lack of education, to find pertinent
data in too wide a zone or to fix the attention upon irrelevant
data. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 9)

413
SUPERVISOR

SUPERVISOR, a course must have a supervisor. He may or may
not be a graduate and experienced practitioner of the course he
is supervising but he must be a trained course supervisor. He is
not expected to teach. He is expected to get the students there,
rolls called, checkouts properly done, misunderstoods handled
by finding what the student doesn’t dig and getting the student
to dig it. The supervisor who tells students answers is a waste
of time and a course destroyer as he enters out-data into the
scene even if trained and actually especially if trained in the
subject. The supervisor is NOT an “instructor” that’s why he’s
called a “supervisor.” (HCO PL 16 Mar 71R)

SUPERVISOR CHECKOUT, a checkout done by the supervisor of
a course or his assistant. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

SUPERVISOR’S DUTY, communication of the data of Sen to the
student so as to achieve acceptance, duplication and application
of the technology in a standard and effective manner. (HCOB 16
Oct 68)

SUPPRESS, to squash, to sit on, to make smaller, to refuse to let
reach, to make uncertain about his reaching, to render or lessen
in any way possible by any means possible, to the harm of the
individual and for the fancied protection of a suppressor. (SH
Spec 84, 6612C13)

SUPPRESSED LIST, no further items on the assessment list read

but the pe still has some symptoms. The list isn’t null. It is

suppressed or invalidated. (HCOB 29 Jan 70)

SUPPRESSION, suppression is “a harmful intention or action

against which one cannot fight back.” Thus when one can do

anything about it, it is less suppressive. (HCO PL 26 Dec 66)

SUPPRESSIVE ACTS, 1. acts calculated to impede or destroy
Sen or a Scientologist. (HCO PL 23 Dec 65) 2. actions or
omissions undertaken to knowingly suppress, reduce or impede
Sen or Scientologists. (HCO PL 23 Dec 65)

SUPPRESSIVE GROUPS, are defined as those which seek to
destroy Sen or which specialize in injuring or killing persons or
damaging their cases or which advocate suppression of mankind.
(HCO PL 29 Jun 68)

SUPPRESSIVE PERSON, 1. he’s solving a present time problem
which hasn't in actual fact existed for the last many trillenia in
most cases, and yet he is taking the actions in present time

414
SURPRISE

which solve that problem. The guy’s totally stuck in present
time, that is the whole anatomy of psychosis. (SH Spec 61,
6505C18) 2. a person who rewards only down statistics and
never rewards an up statistic. He goofs up or vilifies any effort
to help anybody and particularly knifes with violence anything
calculated to make human beings more powerful or intelligent.
A suppressive automatically and immediately will curve any
betterment activity into something evil or bad. (SH Spee 73,
6608C02) 3. a person who doesn’t get case gain because of
continuing overts. (SH Spec 67, 6509C21) 4. the person is in a
mad, howling situation of some yesteryear and is “handling it”
by committing overt acts today. I say condition of yesteryear
but this case thinks it’s today. (HCO PL 5 Apr 65) 5. an SP is a
no-confront case because, not being in his own valence he has no
viewpoint from which to erase anything. That is all an SP is.
(HCO PL 20 Oct 67) 6. those who are destructively antisocial.
(HCO PL 30 Aug 70) 7. a person with certain behavior
characteristics and who suppresses other people in his vicinity
and those other people when he suppresses them become PTS or
potential trouble sources. (SH Spec 78, 6608C25) 8. is one that
actively seeks to suppress or damage Scn or a Scientologist by
suppressive acts. (JSE, p. 48) 9. a person who has had a
counter-postualte to the pe you are handling. (SH Spec 68,
6510C14) Abbr. SP

SUPPRESSOR, the impulse to forbid revelation in another. This
of course, being an overt, reacts on one’s own case as an impulse
to keep oneself from finding out anything from the bank, and of
course suppresses as well the release of one’s own withholds. So
it is more fundamental than a withhold. A “suppressor” is often
considered “social conduct” insofar as one prevents things from
being revealed which might embarrass or frighten others.
(HCOB 15 Mar 62)

SUPREME TEST, the supreme test of a thetan is his ability to
make things go right. (HCOB 19 Aug 67)

SURGES (NEEDLE REACTIONS), sudden long sweeps to the
right. (LRH Def. Notes)

SURPRISE, rapidity of change of state, unpredicted. (HCOB 17
Mar 60)

415
SURVIVAL

SURVIVAL, 1. is a condition susceptible to non-survival. If one is
“surviving,” one is at the same moment admitting that one can
cease to survive, otherwise one would never strive to survive.
(Sen 8-8008, p. 47) 2. survival might be defined as an impulse to
persist through time, in space, as matter and energy. (Sen
8-8008, p. 5) 3. survival is understood to be the basic single
thrust of life through time and space, energy and matter.
Survival is subdivided into eight dynamics. (SOS, p. x)

SURVIVAL GOAL, an optimum solution to existing problems.
(DAB, Vol. II, p. 37, 1951-52)

SURVIVAL SUPPRESSOR, is the combined and variable threats
to the survival of the race or organism. (DMSMH, p. 25)

SURVIVE, the dynamic principle of existence is survive. At the
opposite end of the spectrum of existence is succumb. (SOS
Gloss)

SW, Straightwire. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

SWEETNESS AND LIGHT, a person who cannot conceive of
ever having done anything bad to anybody or anything. (HCOB
3 Sept 59)

wt i My
) wen
~

Po. ,

it

-
som,
SA)

*.

Pig

Sweetness and Light S ‘i ? ,
DoS

SYMBIOTE, 1. the Dn meaning of symbiote is extended beyond
the dictionary definition to mean “any or all life or energy
forms which are mutually dependent for survival.” The atom
depends on the universe, the universe on the atom. (DMSMH,
p. 32) 2. all entities and energies which aid survival. (EOS, p.
101)

416
SYMBOL OF DIANETICS

SYMBOL, 1. an object which has mass, meaning and mobility.
(COHA, p. 54) 2. something which could represent an idea. It is
a piece of energy which is agreed to represent a certain idea.
(2ACC-20A, 5312CM10) 3. an idea which is cloaked in energy of
any kind is actually a symbol. That is the definition of a symbol.
It’s any idea which is fixed in any space with energy. (2ACC-
22A, 53812CM138) 4. pieces of thought, which represent states of
being in the material universe. (5203CM06A) 5. a symbol is an
idea fixed in energy and mobile in space. (COHA, p. 259)

Symbol for Theta

SYMBOL FOR THETA, eighth letter of the Greek alphabet.
Ancient Greeks used this to represent spirit or thought.
Symbol: ©. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

SYMBOL OF DIANETICS, the Greek letter Delta is the basic
form. Green for growth, yellow for life. The four stripes

417
SYMPATHY

represent the four dynamics of Dianetics: Survival as I Self, II
Sex and Family, III] Group and IV Mankind. This symbol was
designed in 1950 and has been used since. (Dn Today)

Sympathy

SYMPATHY, 1. a terrible thing but is considered to be a very
valuable thing. The survival value of sympathy is this: when an
individual is hurt or immobilized, he cannot fend for himself. He
must count on another or others to care for him. His bid for such
care is the enlistment of the sympathy of others. This is
practical. If men weren’t sympathetic, none of us would be alive.
The non-survival value of sympathy is this: an individual fails in
some activity. He then considers himself incapable of surviving
by himself. Even though he isn’t sick actually he makes a bid for
sympathy. A psychosomatic illness is at once an explanation of
failure and a bid for sympathy. (HFP, p. 122) 2. sympathy is
commonly accepted to mean the posing of an emotional state
similar to the emotional state of an individual in grief or apathy.
It is on the tone scale between 0.9 and 0.4. Sympathy follows or
is based upon overt action by the preclear. Sympathy can be
mechanically considered as the posing of any emotion so as to be
similar to the emotion of another. (AP&A, p. 23) 3. sympathy is
a co-flow, it’s sort of a co-beingness. One individual goes onto
the wave-length of another individual. (PDC 23) 4. “I am him”
which is what sympathy is; it’s a low level interchange of
energy. (5209CM04B) 5. equal motion, equal plane, similar
space. (Spr Lect 1, 5303CM23)

SYMPATHY COMPUTATION, if a patient had a tough engramic
background, then broke his leg and got sympathy he thereafter
tends to go around with a simulated broken leg—arthritis, etc.

418
SYNTHETIC VALENCE

etc. This is the sympathy computation. It makes a patient “want
to be sick.” Sickness has a high survival value says the reactive
mind. So it tailors up a body to be sick. (EOS, p. 93)

SYMPATHY ENGRAM, 1. an engram of a very specific nature,
being the effort of the parent or guardian to be kind to a child
who is severely hurt. (DTOT, p. 95) 2. a sympathy engram
would go something like this: A small boy, much victimized by
his parents, is extremely ill. His grandmother attends him and
while he is delirious soothes him and tells him she will take care
of him, that she will stay right there until he is well. This puts a
high “survival” value on being sick. He does not feel safe around
his parents; he wants his grandmother present (she is a winning
valence because she orders the parents around), and he now has
an engram. (DMSMGH, p. 107) 3. the sympathy engram is one
which comes forward and stays chronic as a psychosomatic
illness. (DMSMH, p. 107)

SYMPATHY EXCITER, a sympathy exciter is any entity on any
dynamic for which the individual has felt sympathy of the
variety between 0.9 and 0.4. Sympathy exciters are most
commonly parents, allies and pets. (AP&A, pp. 44-45)

SYMPTOMS, 1. pains, emotional feelings, tiredness, aches, pres-
sures, sensations, unwanted states of the body, etc. (HCOB 19
May 69) 2. is from either the body directly (such as a broken
bone, a gallstone, or immediate physical cause) or is part of the
content of a mental image picture—lock, secondary or engram.
(HCOB 23 Apr 69)

SYNTHETIC, dub-ins. (PAB 99)

SYNTHETIC VALENCE, 1. an artificial person or the valence
command which makes a person like every stage actor he sees.
Valences commonly exist for household pets and it is not
uncommon for a little girl to be in the valence of her dog or her
cat and express herself with imitated mannerisms. (SOS, Bk. 2,
p. 201) 2. those valences which have never actually confronted
the preclear in the flesh. The Devil of course is the champion-
ship synthetic valence of all time. (PAB 95) 3. valence described
to pe and assumed. (HCOB 14 Jul 56) 4. a synthetic valence is a
description by one personality of a non-present personality.
(5703C10)

419
T

TA, 1. tone arm action. A technical term for a quantitative
measure of case gain in the Sen processing of a preclear for a
given unit of time. ([SE, p. 38) 2. tone arm refers to the tone
arm or its motion. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Sen VI Part One Glossary
of Terms) 3. the total number of divisions down, a tone arm has
moved accurately in a unit of time. (HCOB 24 Jul 64) 4. a
measure of the amount of encysted force which is leaving the
case. ( SH Spec 291, 6308C06)

TACIT CONSENT, 1. in the case of two preclears working on
each other, each one assuming in his turn the auditor’s role, a
condition can arise where each prevents the other from contact-
ing certain engrams. This is tacit consent. A husband and wife
may have a mutual period of quarrels or unhappiness. Engaged
upon clearing each other, working alternately as auditor, they
avoid, unknowingly, but by reactive computation, the mutual
period, thus leaving in place painfully emotional engrams.
(DMSMH, p. 319) 2. mutual avoidance of certain subjects. (SH
Spec 63, 6110C05)

TACTILE, 1. by tactile we perceive the shape and texture of
surfaces and compounds. (SOS, p. 59) 2. touch. (DMSMH, p. 14)

421
TALKING THE TA DOWN

TALKING THE TA DOWN, it is done by the simple time-honored
action of asking the right question, getting it answered, and
letting the tone arm blow down. To ask the right question on
this technique, you must first know what you are trying to
accomplish. Why do you want to bring the TA down? The
answer is simply, that the TA being high (3.5 or above),
indicates that there is some mass the preclear’s attention is on.
You want that mass out of way so that you can direct the
preclear’s attention where you want it. So what you simply do is
get the preclear to tell you what is in restimulation so that it will
key out without driving the preclear further into his bank—and
thus restimulating more mass, (BTB 14 Mar 71 II)

TAO, 1. it meant the way to solving the mystery which underlies
all mysteries. It wasn’t simply “The Way.” (7ACC-25, 5407C19)
2. means knowingness. Now that is the literal translation of the
word if you want to translate it that way; in other words, it’s an
ancester to the word Scn just as such. (5407C19)

TAPE COURSE, a course relayed by tape recorded lectures or
translations. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

TAPE LECTURE NUMBER, 6408C11 SH Spec 35, Study—Eval-
uation of Information (example of tape lecture number and title).
The first two numbers (64) give the year, 1964. The second two
(08) give the month, August, the eighth month. (C) stands for
copy. The third two numbers (11) give the day, the 11th. SH
Spec gives the course, the Saint Hill Special Briefing Course,
and then the title. From all this you know the lecture was given
on 11 August, 1964, that the (35) is one of the consecutive
numbers assigned for record purposes. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

TAPE PLAYERS, are the machines used on a tape course for
playing back on already recorded magnetic tape. Tape recorders
are the machines used to record the tapes in the first place.
(BTB 22 Nov 71 II)

TAPE RECORDERS, the machines used to record the tape in the
first place. (BTB 22 Nov 71 I)

TA SINK, drops below 2.0 (HCOB 9 Jun 71 I)

422
TECHNICAL EXPERTISE

TCC, Theta Clear Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
TD, Tiger Drill. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

TEARACULI APATHIA MAGNUS, Latinated nonsense for sad
effect. (HCOB 14 Mar 63)

TECH, 1. by tech is meant technology, referring of course to the
application of the precise scientific drills and processes of
Sen. (HCOB 13 Sept 65) 2. abbreviation for “technology” or
“technical,” depending on context. The technology referred to is
normally that contained in HCOBs. It also means the “Technical
Division” in a Scientology Church (Division 4, the division of the
org that delivers training and processing). (BTB 12 Apr 72R)
3. technical. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

TECH DIV, Technical Division. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

TECH IS IN, Scn is being applied and is being correctly applied.
(HCOB 13 Sept 65)

TECHNICAL EXPERTISE, is composed of all the little and large
bits of technique known to the skilled painter, musician, actor,
any artist. He adds these things together in his basic presenta-
tion. He knows what he is doing. And how to do it. And then to
this he adds his message. (HCOB 29 Jul 73)

Tape Recorder

423
TECHNICAL HIERARCHY

TECHNICAL HIERARCHY, a sort of ex officio technical
committee on the subject of technical matters composed gener-
ally of the Senior C/S, C/Ses, Qual Sec, Cramming Officer and
Intern Supervisor that monitors the quality of HGC auditing.
(HCOB 1 Sept 71 I)

TECHNICAL TERM, it’s something that has a specialized
meaning in one subject which doesn’t have any broader
meaning, but may appear in another subject meaning something
else. (HCO PL 22 Sept 72)

TECHNIQUE, a process or some action that is done by auditor
and pe under the auditor’s direction. A technique is a patterned
action, invariable and unchanging, composed of certain steps or
actions calculated to bring about tone arm action and thus better
or free a thetan. (HCOB 26 Nov 63)

TECHNIQUE 8-80, a specialized form of Sen. It is, specifically the
electronics of human thought and beingness. The “8-8” stands
for “Infinity-Infinity” upright, the 0 represents the static, theta.
(Sen 8-80, p. 9)

TECHNIQUE 80, 1. is a method; an application which can be
applied to (1) mest bodies; (2) one lifetime; (3) some segment of
the whole track; or (4) which can be applied to the whole track.
When I say segment of the whole track I mean that you can take
and specialize with Technique 80 on addressing the genetic line
of the mest body only. You can take someone and process only
space opera (the two or ten million years somebody spent in
space). The process is Technique 80. We use motivators, overts
and deds. (5206CM27A) 2. we call Technique 80 the “to be or not
to be” technique which balances out the motivator, the overt act
and the ded. It’s the anatomy of maybe. It becomes an entire
subject of how to take apart maybe. How to get an indecision,
how to get an involved grouped series of incidents apart. Any
method which does this falls under the category of Technique
80. (5206CM23A)

TECHNIQUE 88, 1. a technique is in there for everything. And
that’s why we say Technique 88. There’s an infinity of tech-
niques inside of Technique 88. Technique 88 includes all of the
technology of doing anything that man or any other being has
ever done. (5206CM25B) 2. is processing the theta body and
actually anything that pertains to processing the theta body can

424
TENSION

be lumped into Technique 88. (5206CM27A) 3. the knowledge
and know-how necessary to clear a theta body. (5206CM27A)

TECHNOLOGY, 1. the methods of application of an art or science
as opposed to mere knowledge of the science or art itself.
(HCOB 13 Sept 65) 2. a body of truths. (Class VIII No. 4)

TECH SEC, 1. technical secretary. (HCOB 23 Aug 65) 2. abbrevia-
tion for technical secretary. The title of the person who is head
of the Technical Divsion in a Church of Scientology. (BTB 12
Apr 72)

TECH (TECHNICAL) SERVICES, the activity which enrolls,
routes, schedules, distributes the mail of and assists the housing
of students. (HCOB 21 Sept 70)

TECH TRAINING CORPS, the purpose of the TTC is to produce
well trained auditors, C/Ses and supervisors for the Church in
excess of its delivery demands so as to bring about a 1:1 Tech
Admin Ratio and a superlative level of tech delivery that does
credit to LRH and Sen. All persons currently on full-time
training are automatically part of the TTC. Every Church of
Scientology (Class IV), Saint Hill Organization, Advanced
Organization and Flag has its own TTC. (BPL 13 Apr 75) Abbr.
TTC.

T80, Technique 80 lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)
T88, Technique 88 lectures. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

TEMPERATURE ASSIST, assist for a pe running a temperature.
The temperature process is most effective on a low order

persistent fever that goes on and on for days or even weeks.
(HCOB 23 Jul 71)

TEMPORARILY ENTURBULATED THETA, entheta can exist
as temporary enturbulence in the individual's life force or reason
when he is confronted by unreasonable or non-survival circum-

stances in his environment. This could be called temporarily
enturbulated theta. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 118)

TEN, 1. a preclear carried through to a chronic somatic release.
The tenth act consists of running out, by effort, emotion and
thought, the service facsimile. (AP&A, pp. 18-20) 2. a case
advanced to the point of released service facsimile. (HFP Gloss)

TENSION, a collapsed communication line. (Spr Lect 18, 5304
CM08)

425
TENSOR BEAM

TENSOR BEAM, tractor beam. (Abii 34)
TENTH DYNAMIC, would probably be ethics. (PDC 2)

TEO, the Technical Division Establishment Officer (TEO) estab-
lishes and maintains the tech division. (HCO PL 7 Mar 72)

TERM, terminal—designation of a type of GPM item (R6
materials). (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

TERMINAL, 1. it would be any fixed mass utilized in a communi-
cation system. That, I think, is the best of the various
definitions that have come out for this. Any mass used in a fixed
position in any communications system. Thus you see a man
would be a terminal, but a post could also be a terminal.
(5703PM01) 2. something that has mass and meaning which
originates, receives, relays and changes particles on a flow line.
(HCO PL 25 Jul 72) 3. anything used in a communication
system; something that has mass in it. Something with mass,
meaning and mobility. Anything that can receive, relay or send
a communication. (HCOB 25 Jan 65) 4. any point of no form or
any form or dimension from which energy can flow or by which
energy can be received. (Scn 8-8008, p. 32) 5. a terminal is what
you need in order to get a perception. (Spr Lect 3, 5303M24)
6. one of a pair of reliable items of equal mass and force, the
significance of which the thetan has aligned with his own
intentions. (HCOB 13 Apr 64, Scn VI Part One Glossary of
Terms) 7. an item or identity the pe has actually been sometime
in the past (or present) is called a terminal. It is “the pc’s own
valence” at that time. In the goals problem mass (the black
masses of the reactive mind) those identities which, when
contacted, produce pain, tell us at once that they are terminals.
The person could feel pain only as himself (thetan plus body) and
therefore identities he has been produce pain when its mental
residues (black masses) are recontacted in processing. Symbol:
term. (HCOB 8 Nov 62)

TERMINAL ASSESSMENT, locating the terminals in the case
which, when run, will produce an increase in the responsibility
and reality level of the preclear. (HCOB 3 Jul 59)

426
THAT'S IT!

TERRIBLE TRIO, well, amongst all havingness, what is the
super-gold process? There is one. It is terribly certain, it does
not fail in our experience and its gains are permanent. It is a
process known as the Terrible Trio. The commands of the
Terrible Trio are “Look around the room and tell me what you
could have.” “Look around the room and tell me what you would
let remain.” And, “Look around the room and tell me what you
could dispense with.” When I originally gave the triple having-
ness process to staff auditors somebody sensing its effective-
ness, dubbed it “the Terrible Trio.” (PAB 80)

TERROR, 1. the result of something having appeared engram-
ically and then later on threatening to appear again. (SH Spec
122, 6203C19) 2. terror is a magnitude of fear. (NOTL, p. 21)
3. fear with lots of volume. (SOS, p. 13)

Terror

TERROR STOMACH, simply a confusion in a high degree of
restimulation in the vicinity of the vagus nerve. This is one of
the larger nerves and it goes into agitation under restimulation.
(PAB 107)

TESTED RELEASE, stable release, which would be the fellow
who had no adverse needle reactions on the buttons of help,
control and communication.(SH Spec 4, 6105C26)

THAT’S IT!, when the coach says “That's it” he means “we are
through. We are going to take a breather.” (PAB 152)

427
THEETIE-WEETIE

THEETIE-WEETIE, 1. Slang. it’s from England, means “sweet-
ness and light” (but they can’t face mest or any outness). Cannot
go deeper into the bank than a thought. (LRH Def Notes) 2. a
person with a terribly high OCA who is absolutely for the birds.
The Chart of Human Evaluation will tell you the truth.
(7203C30)

THEETIE-WEETIE CASE, 1. he operates in a totally psychotic
way while being totally serene. The valence is all the way up at
tone 40 and the pc is all the way down at minus eight. (SH Spec
2, 6105C12) 2. a “sweetness and light” case at the extreme top of
the graph who will go to graph bottom before the case starts up
again as though the profile were a cylinder which when it goes
off the top, then appears on the bottom when people are in
“serene” valences (meaning they are wholly overwhelmed as a
thetan). (HCOB 5 Jun 61) 3. is high on the OCA/APA yet makes
no progress. This is because such cases believe you ought to
know what they are thinking about, so every moment around
them you are missing withholds. (BTB 12 Jul 62)

THEFT, the theft of objects is really an effort to steal a self.
Objects represent selves to others. Thieves and what they steal
cannot be understood by the logic of their material needs. They
steal tokens of selves and hope to assume thereby another self.
(HCOB 2 May 58)

THEORY, the data part of a course where the data as in books,
tapes and manuals is given. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

THEORY INSTRUCTOR, assists the theory supervisor. Acts as
auditing supervisor. Handles all theory administration. (HCO
PL 18 Dec 64)

THEORY OF EPICENTERS, see EPICENTER THEORY.

THEORY SUPERVISOR, handles all theory instruction of the
course and acts as auditing supervisor. (HCO PL 18 Dec 64)

THERMAL, 1. by thermal we perceive temperature, hotness and
coldness, and so can evaluate further our current environment
by comparing it to our past environments. (SOS, p. 59) 2. a
vibration of material, air, and so on—if one material is vibrating

428
THETA BOP

fast, we say it’s hot, and if another one is vibrating more slowly,
we Say it’s cold. (5203CM09A) 3. temperature. (DMSMH, p. 14)
4, the recall of temperature. (SOS Gloss)

THETA, 1. theta is thought, life force, élan vital, the spirit, the
soul, or any other of the numerous definitions it has had for
some thousands of years. (SOS, p. 4) 2. the life force, life
energy, divine energy, élan vital, or by any other name, the
energy peculiar to life which acts upon material in the physical
universe and animates it, mobilizes it and changes it. It is
susceptible to alteration in character or vibration, at which time
it becomes enturbulated theta or entheta. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 21)
3. theta is thought, an energy of its own universe analogous to
energy in the physical universe but only occasionally paralleling
electromagnetic-gravitic laws. The three primary components of
theta are affinity, reality, and communication. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 3)
4, reason, serenity, stability, happiness, cheerful emotion,
persistence, and the other factors which man ordinarily
considers desirable. (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 12) 5. an energy existing
separate and distinct from the physical universe. (SOS, p. 4)
6. Greek for thought or life or the spirit. (Aud 10 UK) 7. not a
nothingness. It just happens to be an exterior thing to this
universe—so you couldn’t talk about it in this universe’s terms.
(PDC 6)

THETA BEING, 1. the “I,” it is who the preclear is. (HOM, p. 15)
2. the theta being is close to a perpetual motion picture machine
in that it can create energy and impulses. It thinks without
facsimiles, it can act without experience, it can know simply by
being. (HOM, p. 43)

THETA BODY, a thetan very often carries with him a theta body
which he mocked up on the past track and which is a number of
facsimiles of old bodies he has misowned and is carrying along
with him as control mechanisms which he uses to control the
body he is using. (PAB 130)

THETA BOP, 1. is a small or wide steady dance of the needle.
Over a spread of one-eighth of an inch, say (depending on
sensitivity setting—it can be half an inch), the needle goes up
and down perhaps five or ten times a second. It goes up, sticks,

429
THETA CLEAR

falls, sticks, goes up, sticks, falls, sticks, etc., always the same
distance, like a slow tuning fork. It is a constant distance and a
constant speed. A theta bop means “death,” “leaving,” “don’t
want to be here.” It is caused by a yoyo of the preclear as a
thetan vibrating out and into the body or a position in the body.
It’s as if the needle is jumping between two peaks across a
narrow valley. (EME, p. 16) 2. a small or wide steady dance of
the needle. Depending on the sensitivity setting it can be
anything from one-eighth to half an inch wide. It is very rapid,
perhaps five or ten times a second. (BIEM, p. 43) 3. a diagnostic
read, a sort of yoyo—in and out. It does not matter a continental
how wide the theta bop is. It can be a whole dial wide. Most
theta bops do it repetitively. One dip and one recovery at the
exact same speed over the same area would be a one-motion
theta bop. A theta bop has the equal halt at both ends. (SH Spee
1, 6105C07)

THETA CLEAR, 1. it is a person who operates exterior to a
body without need of a body. (SH Spec 59, 6109C27) 2. that
state wherein the preclear can remain with certainty outside his
body when the body is hurt. (PAB 33) 3. a theta clear, then can
be defined as a person who is at cause over his own reactive
bank and can create and uncreate it at will. Less accurately he is
a person who is willing to experience. Theta clear is stable. (Abi
92M) 4. theta clear would mean clear of the mest body or cleared
of the necessity to have a mest body. (5206CM26A) 5. there are
two types of theta clear, the theta being which is cleared of its
necessity or compulsion to have a body and a theta being which
is cleared all the way on the track. (5206CM26B) 6. the basic
definition of theta clear is: no further necessity for beingnesses.
(SH Spec 36, 6108C09) 7. this is a relative not an absolute term.
It means that the person, this thought unit, is clear of his body,
his engrams, his facsimiles, but can handle and safely control a
body. (COHA, p. 248) 8. in its highest sense, means no further
dependency on bodies. (SCP, p. 3) 9. an individual who, as a
being, is certain of his identity apart from that of the body, and
who habitually operates the body from outside, or exteriorized.
(PXL, p. 16)

THETA CLEARING, 1. to create a theta clear it is only necessary
to bring the being up to a point where it can leave and return

430
THETAN

upon a mest body. (HOM, p. 59) 2. the emancipation or
exteriorization of a soul. (PXL, p. 26)

THETA E, earth theta line. (HCL-15, 5203CM10A)
THETA FORCE, theta force is reason. (SOS, p. 158)

THETA I, theta individual which is the individual you are and are
aware of being. (HCL-15, 52083CM10A)

THETA LINE, 1. a timeless, spaceless, influence capable of
making recordings, capable of animating and motivating,
controlling, forming, destroying, conserving matter, energy,
space and time. (HCL-19, 5203CM10A) 2. that line where the
individual uses the genetic line to make one or many bodies that
pass through time and the theta body inhabits the other body
from just before conception until slightly after death. This theta
line is subject to several different bodies. (HCL-20, 5203CM10B)
3. life monitoring energy and making bodies. (HCL-15,
5203CM10A)

THETA-MEST THEORY, 1. a theory generated by myself in the
fall of 1950 as an effort to explain (just a theory) the phenomena
of an analyzer working in one direction and a reactive mind
working in quite another, the reactive mind being interesting,
and the analyzer being interested. (5410CM06) 2. the idea is that
life is a no-substance thing, up against a physical universe which
is a substance thing. Here is nothingness up against a some-
thingness interacting where the nothingness or the no-substance
thing is actually giving orders to and handling the all substance
thing, the physical universe. (UPC 3 5406CM——-) 3. the idea
that there was a universe and that there was thought—theta -
without wave-length, without mass, without time, without
position in space: this was life. And that was impinged upon
something else called the physical universe, which was a
mechanical entity which did things in a peculiar way, and these
two things together, theta-mest interacting, gave us life forms.
(PXL, p. 140)

THETAN, 1. the living unit we call, in Sen, a thetan, that being
taken from the Greek letter theta, the mathematic symbol used

431
THETAN EXTERIOR

in Sen to indicate the source of life and life itself. (Abid Ma 1)
2. the awareness of awareness unit which has all potentialities
but no mass, no wave-length and no location. (HCOB 3 Jul 59)
3. the being who is the individual and who handles and lives in
the body. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) 4. (spirit) is described in Sen as
having no mass, no wave-length, no energy and no time or
location in space except by consideration or postulate. The spirit
is not a thing. It is the creator of things. (FOT, p. 55) 5. the
personality and beingness which actually is the individual and is
aware of being aware and is ordinarily and normally the
“person” and who the individual thinks he is. The thetan is
immortal and is possessed of capabilities well in excess of those
hitherto predicted for man. (Scn 8-8008, p. 9) 6. the name given
to the life source. It is the individual, the being, the personality,
the knowingness of the human being. (Sen 8-80, p. 46) 7. energy-
space production unit. (COHA, p. 247) 8. in the final analysis
what is this thing called thetan? It is simply you before you
mocked yourself up and that is the handiest definition I know of.
(5608C——) 9. the person himself—not his body or his name, the
physical universe, his mind, or anything else; that which is
aware of being aware; the identity which is the individual. The
thetan is most familiar to one and all as you. (Aud 25 UK) 10. a
static that can consider, and can produce space and energy and
objects. (PXL, p. 121)

THETAN EXTERIOR, 1. a being who knows he is a spirit with a
body and not just a body. (Aud 18) 2. he’s out but if the body
were to be injured he would be back in. (PDC 52) 3. a being not
influenced by a body. (SH Spec 82, 6611C29) 4. a thetan who is
clear of the body and knows it but is not yet stable outside. (Scn
8-8008 Gloss)

THETAN PLUS BODY (on the tone scale), a bunch of social
responses stimulus-response mechanisms that are built into the
being by the society. (PDC 1)

THETAN TONE SCALE, the sub-zero to 40.0 scale is the range
of the thetan. A thetan is lower than body death since it
survives body death. It is in a state of knowingness below 0.375
only when it is identifying itself as a body and is to its own
thinking, the body. (Scn 8-80, p. 52)

432
THETA TRAPS

THETA PERCEPTICS, communication with the theta universe.
Such perceptics may include hunches, predictions, ESP at
greater and lesser distances, communication with the “dead,”
perception of the Supreme Being, etc. (SOS Gloss)

THETA PERCEPTION, that which one perceives by radiating
towards an object and from the reflection perceiving various
characteristics of the object such as size, odor, tactile, sound,
color, etc. Certainty of perception is increased by drilling in
certainties as above. Theta perception is dependent upon
willingness to handle and to create space, energy and objects in
view of the fact that the mest universe can be established easily
to be an illusion. One must have an ability to perceive illusions
before one can clearly perceive the mest universe. The thetan
who cannot perceive the mest universe easily will also be found
to be incapable of handling and orientating other kinds of
illusions with certainty. Theta perception is also a direct index
to responsibility, for responsibility is the willingness to handle
force. (Sen 8-8008 Gloss)

THETA POSTULATE, a postulate made without regard to
evaluations, conclusions, or time. (PDC 7)

THETA TIME, only now, but some of it gets left back in mest
time in an engram. (NOTL, p. 15)

10

Theta to the Nth Degree

THETA TO THE NTH DEGREE, meaning unlimited or vast. 0".
(HCOB 28 Aug 65)

THETA TRAPS, how can you trap a thetan? By curiosity, by
giving him awards and prizes (of an implant), by retractor
screens, by mock-ups, by ornate buildings which he will enter

433
THETA UNIVERSE

unsuspectingly to be electroniced down: by many such means
the thetan is reduced from knowing to a colonist, a slave, a
MEST body. All theta traps have one thing in common: they use
electronic force to knock the thetan into forgetting, into
unknowingness, into effect. Their purpose is to rid the area of
those nuisances, the thetans who cannot be policed, and gain
personnel—always the former, not always the latter. (HOM, pp.
71-72)

THETA UNIVERSE, 1. thought matter (ideas), thought energy,
thought space, and thought time, combined in an independent
universe analogous to the material universe. One of the
purposes of theta is postulated as the conquest, change, and
ordering of mest. (SOS Gloss) 2. is a postulated reality for which
there exists much evidence. (SOS, p. 99)

THINKING, 1. that process in which a person engages by which
he hopes he will someday come to know. (2ACC 1B, 5311CM17)
2. the combination of past observations to derive a future
observation. (PAB 8) 3. a substitution for an ability to predict.
(2ACC 21A, 5312CM11) 4. condensed effort. (2ACC 214A,
5812CM11) 5. comparing a particular datum with the physical
universe as it is known and observed. (Lecture: Education and
the Auditor, 1951, p. 9)

THINKINGNESS, 1. down the scale at the level below effort. It
comes in as figure-figure-figure-figure-figure. “I'll just figure
this out and I'll get a computation and a calculation and I'll add it
up to. . . Now let me see . . .” We don’t know how all of this
mechanic got into a postulate, but they’ve let it get in there. So
that’s the level, thinkingness. (PXL, p. 169) 2. the potential of
considering. (COHA Gloss)

THIRD DYNAMIC, see DYNAMICS.

THIRD PARTY LAW, the law would seem to be: a third party
must be present and unknown in every quarrel for a conflict to
exist. (HCOB 26 Dec 68)

THIRD POSTULATE, 1. forget. (PAB 66) 2. forgettingness. (SH
Spec 35, 6108C08)

434
THREE FLOWS

THIRD RAIL, is a special form of factual havingness. Commands
and position: are the same as in factual havingness. However
the commands are run in a special ratio of: 8 commands of
“vanish,” 2 commands of “continue” and 1 command of “have.”
Purpose: to remedy extreme conditions of not-isness, to remedy
obsessive waste, to permit use of the process without bogging
preclear in any one of the commands. (HCOB 3 Jul 59)

THIRD STAGE RELEASE, see STAGES OF RELEASE.

THOUGHT, 1. the perception of the present and the comparison
of it to the perceptions and conclusions of the past in order to
direct action in the immediate or distant future. (Sen 0-8, p. 78)
2. the manifestation of evolving a low-level certainty of observa-
tion from a number of past observations. (PAB 8) 3. a static of
unlimited capabilities, which has itself no wave-length, no
space, and no time. It is impinged upon a physical universe
which has space, time, energy and matter. The mission of
thought is survival in the physical universe and in order to do
this it is effecting a conquest of the physical universe. (5203
CM03B) 4. thought is the phenomenon of combining, imagining
or postulating theta facsimiles for the estimation of future
physical efforts. (AP&A, p. 22) 5. thought is not motion in space
and time. Thought is a static containing an image of motion.
(HFP, p. 25) 6. the subject matter of Sen. It is considered as a
kind of “energy” which is not part of the physical universe. It
controls energy, but has no wave-length. It uses matter but it
has no mass. It is found in space, but it has no position. It
records time but it is not subject to time. In Sen the Greek word
(and letter), theta, is used as a symbol for thought. (Abil 114A)
7. the causal agent in an organism. It is thought which causes
everything both structural and functional that happens in an
organism. An organism without thought is already dead. (Abi
114A)

THREE D, written 3D. See ROUTINE 3D.

THREE D CRISS CROSS, written 3DXX. See ROUTINE 3D
CRISS CROSS.

THREE FLOWS, see TRIPLE FLOWS.

435
THREE GA XX (3GAXX)

THREE GA XX (3GAXX), 1. it’s a research numbering for a
process called Three GA Criss Cross. It lists and handles some
types of implants. (LRH Def. Notes) 2. 3GA Criss Cross is an
activity engaged upon by the auditor to unburden the case and
locate goals. (SH Spec 218, 6211027) Abbr. 3GAXX.

3 MAY [72] PL, Hubbard Communications Office Policy Letter 3
May 1972 Important —Executive Series 12—Ethics and Execu-
tives, executive or officers steps for getting in Ethics on a staff
member. (HCO PL 3 May 72)

3MC, Third Melbourne Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

THREE M’s, a symbol has three M’s, mass, meaning and mobility.
(COHA, p. 91)

THREE (3) S & Ds, (1) is a specific rundown for doing S & Ds
covered fully in HCOB 30 Jun 71R. (2) 3S & Ds as a rundown is
used in the PTS Rundown without change. (HCOB 9 Dec 71RA)

THREE UNIVERSES, 1. the universes, then, are three in
number: the universe created by one viewpoint, the universe
created by every other viewpoint, the universe created by the
mutual actions of viewpoints which is agreed to be upheld—the
physical universe. (COHA, p. 185) 2. the first of these is one’s
own universe. The second universe would be the material
universe, which is the universe of matter, energy, space and
time, which is the common meeting ground of all of us. The third
universe is actually a class of universes, which could be called
“the other fellow’s universe,” for he and all the class of “other
fellows” have universes of their own. (COHA, p. 188)

THREE-VALUED LOGIC, see LOGIC.

THROUGH A CHECKSHEET, means through the entire check-
sheet—theory, practical, all drills—and done in sequence. (BPL
27 Jul 69)

THROW A CURVE, see CURVE.

THUMB SYSTEM, an auditor trick that permits better attention
on pes’ answers and less command mistakes on alternate
command processes, when you give the plus command put your
thumb on your index finger. Hold it there until it is answered.
When the minus command is given, put your thumb on the

436
TIME

second fingertip until it is answered. This sets up a physical
universe tally and keeps one from mucking up the command
sequence without having to “hold it in mind.” This permits
better observation of the pe. (HCOB 1 Sept 60)

THUNK, Slang. thinkingness. (SH Spec 143, 6205C03)
TICK, small jerk of needle, (meter read). (HCOB 29 Apr 69)

TIGER, someone who has been repeatedly associated with goofed
projects and operations and who actually has caused such to
occur. He is a person who is continually out-ethics. He has failed
to get ethics in on himself and he is in a group of people as a
tiger would be dangerous. (FO 872) [This is the derogatory form
of this term and when it is used by LRH is not always meant in
the above sense. ]

TIGER DRILL, 1. a drill where the coach can give different reads
and different goals for the student auditor to work on, the only
condition being that the goals selected be those which would be
most unlikely on anyone’s goals list. The goal used in this drill
is: To be a tiger. (HCOB 1 Aug 62 II) 2. the use of the word tiger
was so that a null, unmeaningful word would be on the drill or
not restimulate anyone. Later, because of the drill, tiger=SP.
(LRH Def. Notes) 3. that series of buttons which are capable of
preventing a right goal or level from reading or making a wrong
level read, combined in an appropriate exercise. (HCOB 7 Nov
62 III) 4. this drill is used in Routine 2-12 to sort out the last
three or four items left in on each nulling. In 3GAXX it is used
on the last three or four items left in and on any goals list.
(HCOB 29 Nov 62)

TIME, 1. time is basically a postulate that space and particles will
persist. (The rate of their persistence is what we measure with
clocks and the motion of heavenly bodies.) (PAB 86) 2. time is
actually a consideration but there is the experience of time.
There is a distance, there is a velocity of particle travel—and
the movement of that particle in relationship to its starting point
and in relationship to its ending point, itself is the consideration
of time. (5410CM13) 3. exists in those things a thetan creates. It
is a shift of particles, always making new space, always at an
agreed-upon rate. (COHA, p. 249) 4. simply a consideration, the
considerations of time itself are mechanically tracked by the
alteration of the position of the particles in space. (PAB 46) 5. a

487
TIMELESSNESS

manifestation in space which is varied by objects. (Sen 8-8008,
p. 14) 6. an abstract manifestation which has no existence
beyond the idea of time occasioned by objects, where an object
may be either energy or matter. (Scn 8-8008, p. 26) 7. time is
the co-action of particles. You can’t have action of particle at all
unless you have space, and when you have a change in space
then you have a different time. (PXZ, p. 135) 8. time is a
consideration which brings about persistence. And the mechanic
of bringing about that persistence is, by alteration. And so we
have alter-is-ness taking place immediately after an as-is-ness is
created, and so we get persistence. In other words, we have to
change the location of a particle in space. (PXL, p. 114)

4

Time (Def. 4)

TIMELESSNESS, merely means something that endures across
long spans of time. (PDC 13)

TIME LIMITER, the auditor prefaces a question with a time

limiter such as, “In this lifetime .. .” “In auditing .. .” or
whatever applies. (HCOB 3 Jul 62)

TIME SHIFT, 1. the auditor can take a preclear straight through
an incident by announcing “It is one minute later, it is two
minutes later. Three minutes have gone by,” and so forth. The
auditor does not have to wait for those minutes to elapse; he
just announces them. The time shift is generally used when the

438
TIME TRACK

auditor is trying to get the preclear ahead of an incident to make
sure that he really has a beginning. (DMSMH, p. 224) 2. the
technique by which a preclear can be moved short or long
distances on the track by specific announcement of the amount
of time forward the preclear is to go or time backwards, or
return or progression through intervals of time. (It is also useful
to find out if the preclear is moving or which direction he is
moving on the time track in order to discover the action some
engram may be having upon him.) (DMSMH, p. 226)

TIME TAB, thoughts are filed by your concept of when they
happened. As long as you know the time tab of any thought, it is
yours completely. When you do not know the time tab of a
thought, you no longer control it. (HFP, p. 111)

Time Track (Def. 1)

TIME TRACK, 1. the consecutive record of mental image pictures
which accumulates through the preclear’s life or lives. It is very
exactly dated. (HCOB 23 Apr 69) 2. the time span of the

439
TIP

individual from beingness to present time on which lies the
sequence of events of his total existence. (HCOB 9 Mar 60)
3. the endless record, complete with fifty-two perceptions of the
pe’s entire past. The time track is a very accurate record of the
pe’s past, very accurately timed, very obedient to the auditor. If
motion picture film were 3D, had fifty-two perceptions and could
fully react upon the observer, the time track could be called a
motion picture film. It is at least 350,000,000,000,000 years long,
probably much longer, with a scene about every 1/25 of a
second. (HCOB 15 May 63) 4. consists of all the consecutive
moments of “now” from the earliest moment of life of the
organism to present time. Actually, the track is a multiple
bundle of perceptics; and it might be said that there is a time
track for each perceptic, all tracks running simultaneously. The
track might also be considered as a system of filing recordings
made of the environment and the organism, filed according to
time received. All the perceptions of the environment and the
organism during the entire lifetime, up to now, or present time,
are recorded, faintly or deeply, upon the time track. (SOS,
p. 102)

TIP, Technical Individual Program. This form of issue is
originated so that personal programs may be issued for students
and pes and published. It is individually written for the student
or pc. It is on green paper. (TIP 1 FAO, 20 Jun 71)

TOCKY, needle reaction—small RS. (HCOB 8 Jul 64 II)

TOKEN, 1. the term token is defined to embrace the objects and
habits which an individual or society keeps by not knowing they
are extensions of an ally. (DMSMH, p. 354) 2. the token is a
very special kind of restimulator. The token is any object,
practice or mannerism which one or more allies used. By
identity thought the ally is survival, anything the ally used or
did is, therefore, survival. (DMSMH, p. 355)

TONE, 1. tones have to do with physics, they have to do with
vibration, they have to do with corresponding vibrations in the
physical sciences. It merely means a condition. (5904C08)
2. sound quality; the difference between a jagged or ragged
sound wave and a smooth sound wave as in a musical note. (SA,
p. 85) 3. the emotional condition of an engram or the general
condition of an individual. (DTOT Gloss)

440
TONE ARM

TONE 0 SOCIETY, a society governed by the mystery and
superstition of some mystic body. (DMSMH, p. 405)

TONE 1 SOCIETY, a society managed and dictated to by the
whims of one man or a few men. (DMSMH, p. 405)

TONE 2 SOCIETY, a society hindered by arbitrary restrictions
and oppressive laws. (DMSMH, p. 405)

TONE 4 SOCIETY, a free society, working in complete coopera-
tion toward common goals; any Golden Age is a tone 4.
(DMSMG, p. 405)

IN

©
Ow

Tone Arm

TONE ARM, 1. meter control lever. (HCO PL 5 May 65) 2. the
measure of accumulation of charge. (Class VIII No. 6) 3. regis-
ters density of mass (ridges, pictures, machines, circuits) in
the mind of the preclear. This is actual mass, not imaginary, and
can be weighed, measured by resistance etc. Therefore the tone
arm registers state of case at any given time in processing. The
tone arm also registers advance of case during processing by
moving. (EME, p. 9) 4. the tone arm reads at 5000 ohms female
and 12,500 ohms male for the body. It reads the body. When a
person is Clear the E-meter ceases to read. That tells you why a

441
TONE ARM ACTION

dead thetan reads at 2 or 3. (SH Spec 1, 6105C07) 5. the
instrument which measures the adequacy of restimulation. That
shows you that an adequate amount of charge is being restim-
ulated in the session, and that it is being adequately dispelled on
the itsa line. This shows you that the cycle of what’s-it-itsa is in
progress and the amount of restimulation is adequate to get
auditing done. (SH Spec 295, 6308C15) Abbr. TA.

TONE ARM ACTION, is measured by divisions down per 2 1/2
hour session or per hour of auditing. TA action is not counted by
up and down, only down is used. Usually the decimal system is
used. (HCOB 25 Sept 63)

TONE ARM BLOWDOWN, a sudden downwards motion of the
tone arm. (EMD, p. 27)

TONE ARM COUNTER, records the distance of downward
movements traversed by the tone arm. It is recorded in
numbers of divisions—from 4 to 3 would be one division. (BIEM,
p. 38)

TONE ARM MOTION, the amount of divisions, down, measured
for a 2 1/2 hour session. (EMD, p. 25) See also TONE ARM
ACTION.

TONE FOUR, 1. denotes a person who has achieved rationality
and cheerfulness. (DTOT, p. 60) 2. the emotional state of
enthusiasm. (DTOT, p. 10) 3. tone 4 indicates eager pursuit of
activity, with complete freedom of choice for other activities as
desired. (NOTE, p. 99)

TONE 40, 1. defined as “giving a command and just knowing that
it will be executed despite any contrary appearances.” Tone 40
is positive postulating. (PAB 133) 2. a positive postulate with no
counter-thought expected, anticipated or anything else; that is,
total control. (PAB 152) 3. an execution of intention. (HCOB 23
Aug 65) 4. means unlimited space at will. (5707C25)

TONE 40 AUDITING, 1. positive, knowing, predictable control
toward the preclear’s willingness to be at cause concerning his
body and his attention. (HCOB 3 Jul 59) 2. control by direct tone
40 command. (HCOB 2 Apr 58)

442
TOPECTOMY

TONE 40 BOOK AND BOTTLE, is not Opening Procedure by
Duplication. You have to be ready to assume total control of the
preclear to run tone 40 Book and Bottle. The commands are the
same, except that you never acknowledge anything but the
execution of the auditing commands. (PAB 153)

TONE 40 COMMAND, intention without reservation. (HCOB 1
Dec 65)

TONE 40 8-C, a total accurate estimation of effort with no halts or
jagged motions—that is, smooth. (PAB 152)

TONE SCALE, 1. we have a gradient scale from space to matter
which starts at the arbitrary number of 40.0 for our purposes
and goes down to 0.0 for the purposes of Homo sapiens and to
—8.0 for the purposes of estimating a thetan. This gradient
scale is called the tone scale. (Sen 8-8008, p. 20) 2. the main
gradient scale of Sen. One of the most important observations
which led to the formulation of this scale was the change in
emotional manifestation exhibited by a person who was being
processed. The progress from painful emotions to pleasant
emotions was so reliable and evident on indication of success,
that it became the main measuring stick of the progress of a
case. (Abil 114A) 3. essentially an assignation of numerical value
by which individuals can be numerically classified. It is not
arbitrary but will be found to approximate some actual
governing law in nature. (DTOT, p. 59) 4. under affinity we
have the various emotional tones ranged from the highest to the
lowest and these are, in part, serenity (the highest level),
enthusiasm (as we proceeded downward towards the baser
affinities), conservatism, boredom, antagonism, anger, covert
hostility, fear, grief, apathy. This in Sen is called the tone scale.
(FOT, p. 40) 5. a scale which plots the descending spiral of life
from full vitality and consciousness through half-vitality and
half-consciousness down to death. (SA, p. 37) 6. the range of
emotion. The tone scale goes in harmonics of movement, and
that is all. (5208CM04B) 7. a study of varying degrees of ARC.
(COHA, p. 162)

TOPECTOMY, operation which removes pieces of brain somewhat
as an apple corer cores apples. (DMSMH, p. 193)

443
TOP OPPTERM

TOP OPPTERM, the final achievement of the goal. (SH Spec 329,
6312C12)

TOP TRIANGLE, it is the KRC triangle. The points are K for
knowledge, R for responsibility and C for control. (HCO PL 18
Feb 72)

>

Top Triangle

TOTAL FREEDOM, would be existence without barriers. (SH
Spec 20, 6106C26)

TOTAL KNOWINGNESS, the static has the capability of total
knowingness. Total knowingness would consist of total ARC.
(COHA, p. 16)

TOTAL POWER, occurs when an individual can selectively
confront or not confront anything. (SH Spec 84, 6612C13)

TOUCH, the sense of touch is that communication channel which
informs the central control system of the body whenever some
portion of the body is in contact with the material universe,
other organisms, or the organism itself. It has four subdivisions:
pressure, friction, heat or cold and oiliness. An aberrated sense
of touch is partially responsible for a dislike of food as well as
impotency and antipathy for the sexual act. (SA, p. 90)

TOUCH ASSIST, 1. an assist which brings the patient’s attention
to injured or affected body areas. (HCOB 2 Apr 69) 2. this is run
on both sides of the body. It is run until the pain is gone, cog,

444
TR-4

F/N. It is run around the injury and especially below the injury;
i.e. further from the head than the injury. Use a simple
command like “Feel my finger. Thank you.” (BTB 9 Oct 67R)

TOUGH CASE, the tough case (who is also the difficult student) is
the sole reason one has an urge to alter a process. The poor TA
type case or the “no change” response to routine processes.
(HCO PL 5 Apr 65 I)

TR, training regimen or routine. Often referred to as a training
drill. TRs are a precise training action putting a student through
laid out practical steps gradient by gradient, to teach a student
to apply with certainty what he has learned. (HCOB 19 Jun 71
ITT)

TR-0, a drill to train students to confront a preclear with auditing
only or with nothing. The whole idea is to get the student able
to be there comfortably in a position three feet in front of a
preclear, to be there and not do anything else but be there.
(HCOB 16 Aug 71 I)

TR-1, a drill to train the student to deliver a command newly and
in a new unit of time to a preclear without flinching or trying to
overwhelm or using a via. A phrase is picked out of the book
Alice in Wonderland and read to the coach. It is repeated until
the coach is satisfied it arrived where he is. TR-1 is called “Dear
Alice.” (HCOB 16 Aug 71 II)

TR-2, a drill to teach students that an acknowledgement is a
method of controlling preclear communication and that an
acknowledgement is a full stop. (HCOB 16 Aug 71 II)

TR-3, a drill to teach a student to duplicate without variation an
auditing question, each time newly, in its own unit of time, not
as a blur with other questions, and to acknowledge it. It is to
teach that one never asks a second question until he has
received an answer to the one asked. (HCOB 16 Aug 71 IT)

TR-A4, a drill to teach the student not to be tongue-tied or startled
or thrown off session by originations of the preclear and to
maintain ARC with the preclear throughout an origination.
(HCOB 16 Aug 71 II)

445
TR-5

TR-5, 1. a drill called “Hand Mimicry,” a drill to educate students
that verbal commands are not entirely necessary. To make
students physically telegraph an intention and to show the
students the necessity of having preclear obey commands.
(HCOB 11 Jun 57) 2. first in auditing we have to get the pc to sit
there and be willing to be audited. We have for this many
processes. Best is TR-5. “You make that body sit in that chair.”
“Thank you.” (HCOB 8 Apr 58, Auditing the PC on Clear
Procedure)

TR-5N, 1. is ARC break handling. (HCOB 7 Dec 58) 2. the
commands are “What has anyone done wrong to you?” and
“What have you done wrong to people?” and other ARC break
questions. (HCOB 17 Dec 58 II) [Later revised to] 3. to handle
charge on the auditor, TR-5N should be run, if charge does not
blow on a little two way comm. TR-5N is: “What have I done to
you?” “What have you done to me?” (HCOB 25 Jan 61)

TR-6, called 8-C (body control) the first part of this drill is to
accustom students to moving another body than their own
without verbal communication. The second part is to accustom
students to moving another body, by and while giving com-
mands, only, and to accustom students to proper commands of
8-C. (HCOB 7 May 68)

TR-7, a drill to train a student never to be stopped by a person
when he gives a command. To train him to run fine control in
any circumstances; to teach him to handle rebellious people and
to bring about his willingness to handle other people. (HCOB 7
May 68)

TR-8, a drill to make students clearly achieve tone 40 commands.
To clarify intentions as different from words. To start students
on the road to handling objects and people with postulates and
to obtain obedience not wholly based on spoken commands.
(HCOB 7 May 68)

TR-9, a drill to make students able to maintain tone 40 under any
stress or duress. (HCOB 7 May 68)

TR-10, for the case who cannot handle a PT problem with a
process there is always locational (TR Ten). Many a person with

446
TRACTOR RIDGE

a PT problem can only participate in a session to the extent of
TR Ten, “You notice that object (wall, floor, chair, etc.)” (SCP,
p. 8)

TR-101, the purpose of TR-101 is to get the student able to give
all R3R commands accurately in correct order without hesitation
or having to think what the next command should be. (BTB 9
Oct 71R VII)

TR-102, a drill called “Auditing a Doll.” Its purpose is to
familiarize the student with the materials of auditing and
coordinate and apply the commands and processes of Standard
Dianetics in an auditing session. (BTB 9 Oct 71R VII)

TR-103, this drill is to give the student auditor total certainty on
the R3R procedure, handling the meter and the admin at the
same time. (BTB 20 May 70)

TR-104, this drill is to train the student auditor to deliver a
standard session, with standard procedure, using standard
commands, without session additives, and to train the student
auditor to apply TRs 0-4 in the R3R procedure, here having a
“real” pc, E-meter and admin handled with skill. (BTB 20 May
70)

TRACK, the time track—the endless record, complete with
fifty-two perceptions of the pe’s entire past. (HCOB 18 Apr 64,
Sen VI Part One Glossary of Terms)

TRACTOR BEAM, 1. an energy flow which the thetan shortens.
If one placed a flashlight beam upon a wall and then, by
manipulating the beam, brought the wall closer to him by it, he
would have the action of a tractor beam. Tractor beams are used
to extract perceptions from a body by a thetan. (Sen 8-8008,
p. 49) 2. a method of contracting. The tractor beam contracts
when energized. (PDC 8) 3. a pulling wave. (Scn 8-80, p. 38)
4. in-tractors are tractors put on the preclear by the environ-
ment. Out-tractors are tractors which the preclear puts on the
environment. (5208CM04B)

TRACTOR RIDGE, that ridge formed by two tractor beams in
conflict operating against each other. (Sen 8-8008, p. 49)

447
TRAINED SCIENTOLOGIST

TRAINED SCIENTOLOGIST, someone with a special knowledge
in the handling of life. (Aud 75 UK)

TRAINING, a formal activity imparting the philosophy or tech-
nology of Dn and Sen to an individual or group and culminates in
the award of a grade or certificate. (Aud 2 UK)

TRAINING AND SERVICES BUREAU, that bureau on Flag,
responsible for training, processing and other technical matters.
(BTB 12 Apr 72R)

TRAINING PATTERN, 1. that stimulus-response mechanism
resolved by the analytical mind to care for routine activity or
emergency activity. It is held in the somatic mind and can be
changed at will by the analytical mind. (DMSMH, p. 39)

TRAINING 13 HC, 1. this is a general understanding, answering
the student or trainee’s origin exercise, for use in stress analysis;
a version of “Training 13” revised for HC from HCOB 11 Jun 57
Rev 12 May 72, Training and CCH Processes. (BTB 25 Jun
70R II)

TRANSFERENCE, 1. the patient flipped into another valence.
(SH Spee 65, 6507C27) 2. the transference of the patient into the
valence of the practitioner. (Cert, Vol. 9, No. 7)

TRANSGRESSION, an action against a person or being or thing
with which one has a moral code or an understanding or a
co-action. (SH Spec 62, 6110C04)

TRANS-ORBITAL LEUCOTOMY, an operation which, while the
patient is being electrically shocked, thrusts an ordinary dime
store ice pick into each eye and reaches up to rip the analyzer
apart. (DMSMH, p. 194)

TRANSPOSITION, that act of taking a person who is here and
under influence, like hypnosis or something of this sort, and
persuading him to be somewhere else, and then monitoring him
somewhere else by addressing the body which is kept in a state
of trance or drugs here. (PDC 24)

TRAP, 1. one is trapped by those things to which he will not grant
havingness. A game condition demands that one denies having-
ness. Therefore games trap. Traps are part of games. That is all

448
TRIPLE FLOWS

they are. (PAB 94) 2. all a trap is, is being inside something,
interiorized. (5410CM10C) 3. theta and mest interconnected
too strongly are the components of a trap. Theta is mixed up
with mest, mest is mixed up with theta. (SCP, p. 21)

TRAVELING RR, in listing the RR travels down the list. It
comes from the goal charge. Therefore it can travel. (HCOB 18
Mar 63)

TREBLE ASSESS, (Expanded Dianetics term from tape 7203C30,
Expanded Dianetics) The act of making up a list of things the
pe wants handled from the pe or worksheets or health form,
assessing it for the best reading item (assessment 1) then by
laws of listing and nulling finding who or what would have that
to a single BD F/N item (assessment 2) then by laws of listing
and nulling finding what intention the result of assessment 2
would have (assessment 3) and running the result with Dia-
netics. (LRH Def. Notes)

TRIO, CCH 8 “Look around the room and tell me what you could
have”, “Look around the room and tell me something you would
permit to remain”, “Look around the room and tell me what you
could dispense with”. Originally called the “Terrible Trio”.
(HCOB 11 Jun 57)

TRIPLE FLOWS, 1. a being has a minimum of three flows. By
“flow” is meant a directional thought, energy or action. The
three flows are inward to oneself, outward to another or others,
and crossways, others to others. (HCOB 5 Oct 69) 2. the three
primary flows are outflow (self to another), inflow (another to
self) and crossflow (another to another or others to others). (Sen
0-8, Gloss)

“1 @

Triple Flows

outflow

449
TRIPLE GRADES

DQ ee

B SA

previous page sy

TRIPLE GRADES, 1. I had not discovered that lower grades
were gone out of use and I let be published Triple Grades
which seemed to condense all lower grades. The major pro-
cess or major grade process is definitely not enough, to make
a pe make a lower grade. (HCOB 30 Jun 70R) 2. quickie
lower grades also called “Triple Grades” means one F/N for
each of three flows or three F/Ns per grade. There are not
just three F/Ns per grade. There are dozens of F/Ns. (HCOB
30 Oct 71)

TRIPLES, items run triple flow. (HCOB 12 Oct 69)

TRIPPER, meaning somebody who has taken drugs. (HCOB 23
Sept 68)

TRs WENT OUT, is another way of saying he ceased to be with
the pe. (Class VII, No. 14)

TRUNCATED GPM, 1. one that is cut off at the top. (SH Spec
235, 6304C04) 2. incomplete. (HCOB 28 Sept 63)

TRUTH, 1. truth is the exact consideration. Truth is the exact
time, place, form and event. (PXL, p. 183) 2. that which works.
And that which works most broadly to that which it is applied.
(PDC 19) 3. by definition—is what is. (Class VIII, No. 4)

T/S, Tech Services. (HCOB 5 Mar 71)

crossflow

see definition on

450
TYPE THREE

TTC, Tech Training Corps. (BPL 13 Apr 75)
TVD, television demonstration. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)
TWC (2WC), two-way comm. (HCOB 17 Mar 74)

12,500 OHMS, the exact value for tone arm position 3 on the
E-meter. Ohms is the term for the unit used in measuring
electrical resistance on a line. (EMD, p. 16A)

TWENTY-TEN, that’s twenty minutes of withholds pulled, and
ten minutes of havingness. (SH Spec 97, 6201C09)

TWIN, the study partner with whom one is paired. Two students
studying the same subject who are paired to checkout or help
each other are said to be “twinned.” (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III)

TWIN CHECKOUT, when two students are paired they check
each other out. (HCOB 21 Sept 70)

TWO-VALUED LOGIC, see LOGIC.

TWO-WAY COMM, 1. the precise technology of a process used to
clarify data with another for the other. It is not chatter. It is
governed by the rules of auditing. It is used by supervisors to
clear up blocks to a person’s progress in study, on post, in life or
in auditing. It is governed by the communication cycle as
discovered in Sen. (HCOB 19 Jun 71 III) 2. is an inquiry of the pc
as to what is going on and an invitation to him to look at it, and
that is all. (SH Spee 48, 6108C22) 3. a two-way cycle of
communication would work as follows: Joe, having originated a
communication, and having completed it, may then wait for Bill
to originate a communication to Joe, thus completing the
remainder of the two-way cycle of communication. Thus we get
the normal cycle of a communication between two terminals.
(Dn 55!, p. 84) 4. the cycle is Cause, Distance, Effect, with
Effect then becoming Cause and communicating across a dis-
tance to the original Source, which is now Effect and this we call
a two-way communication. (Dn 55/, p. 64) Abbr. 2WC or TWC.

TYPE THREE, see PTS TYPE THREE.

451
U

UC, Unification Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

UGLINESS, 1. a disharmony of wave motion, no matter how high
the wave length, is ugliness. But ugliness is also a wave, a
disharmony with the wave-length of beauty but very close to it.
(Sen 8-80, p. 26) 2. ugliness is a disharmony in wave discord
with theta. (Sen 8-80, p. 26)

UNBURDENING, 1. as a basic is not at once available on any
chain, one usually unburdens it by running later engrams,
secondaries and locks. The act of unburdening would be digging
off the top to get at the bottom as in moving sand. (HCOB 23
Apr 69) 2. the technique of thoroughly bringing to view
everything contained in an engram by scanning its locks.
Alternate running of the engram and scanning its locks should
bring about a maximal release of entheta. (SOS, Bk. 2, pp.
280-281)

UNCHANGING GRAPH, if a graph is unchanging there was a
PTP. Present time problem is what keeps a graph from
changing. (SH Spec 56, 6503C30)

UNCONSCIOUS, 1. any person who is unaware, to a great degree
is unconscious. (HCOB 3 Jul 59) 2. means a greater or lesser

453
UNCONSCIOUS, THE

reduction of awareness on the part of “I.” An attenuation of
working power of the analytical mind. (DMSMH, p. 46)

UNCONSCIOUS, THE, reactively hidden pictures plus circuits
plus machinery make up the totality of what Freud called the
unconscious. (5810C29)

UNCONSCIOUS MIND, 1. the “unconscious mind” is the mind
which is always conscious. So there is no unconscious mind, and
there is no unconsciousness. (EOS, p. 39) 2. the only mind which
is always conscious. This submind is called the reactive mind.
(SOS, p. xii) See REACTIVE MIND.

UNCONSCIOUSNESS, 1. an excess of randomity imposed by a
counter-effort of sufficient force to cloud the awareness and
direct function of the organism through the mind’s control
center. (Scn 0-8, p. 81) 2. when the analytical mind is attenuated
in greater or lesser degree. (Scn 0-8, p. 66) 3. actually a
manifestation of one’s self-determinism being upset by a coun-
ter-effort. (52083CM08) 4. a condition wherein the organism is
discoordinated only in its analytical process and motor control
direction. (DTOT, p. 25) 5. is the intensification of unknowing-
ness. (SH Spec 15X, 6106C15) 6. a halfway end of cycle. (2ACC
8B, 5311CM24) 7. unconsciousness, light or deep, is merely a
slide in toward death. (HCL 11, 5203CM08)

UNCONTROLLED LISTING, the pc is permitted to list on and on
with no stops or checks. (HCOB 24 Apr 63)

UNDERCUTS, runs on a lower case than. (SCP, p. 22) —

UNDERLISTED LIST, more than one item RRs or RSes or
everything on the list is alive. (SH Spec 255, 6304C04)

UNDER-RESTIMULATION, is just an auditor not putting the
pe’s attention on anything. (HCOB 1 Oct 63)

UNDERSHOOTING, to leave a cycle incomplete and go off to
something else. (HCOB 26 Aug 70)

UNDERSTANDING, 1. understanding is composed ‘of affinity,
reality and communication. (SH Spec 79, 6609C01) 2. knowing-
ness could simply be a potential understanding. It could be an

454
UNIVERSE

ability being carried forward, an action taking place; under-
standing is an action. Understanding is knowingness of life to a
certain direction and object and thing or action. The understand-
ing is knowingness in action. We break down this and we get
affinity, reality and communication. (5411CM05) 3. understand-
ing is a sort of a total solvent, it’s the universal solvent, it
washes away everything. (SH Spee 79, 6609C01)

UNETHICAL CONDUCT, is actually the conduct of destruction
and fear; lies are told because one is afraid of the consequences
should one tell the truth; thus, the liar is inevitably a coward,
the coward is inevitably a liar. (SOS, pp. 128-129)

UNHAPPINESS, unhappiness is only this: the inability to con-
front that which is. (NSOL, p. 25)

UNHAPPY PERSON, one whose acceptance levels are continually
being violated. (UPC 13, 5406C——)

UNINTENTIONAL WITHHOLD, he doesn’t intend to withhold it
but he finds himself in a position of doing so because nobody will
listen. (SH Spee 63, 6110C05)

UNION STATION DESTROY, a process; “You invent a way of
destroying that (indicated) person.” This is run outside on
people chosen at random. It is done to take over destructive
automaticities. (HCOB 17 Mar 75, HGC Clear Procedure Outline
of February 6, AD8)

UNIT FACSMILE, would be any consecutive related experience
in motion and so forth. It would contain as many recordings or
as many separate pictures as sight needs in order to produce
motion, 75 to 125 pictures a second. This experience may have
lasted for a week. (5112CM29B)

UNITS, in 1965 the Saint Hill Special Briefing Course was
organized as follows. It was divided into four units. Unit A
covering Level 0. Unit B covering Levels I and II. Unit C
covering Levels III and IV. Unit D covering Level VI. (HCO PL
27 Feb 65)

UNIVERSE, 1. a universe is defined as a “whole system of
created things.” There could be and are, many universes, and

455
UNIVERSE OF THOUGHT

there could be many kinds of universes. (Scn 8-8008, p. 27) 2. is
an effort to locate oneself. (SH Spec 51, 6109C07)

UNIVERSE OF THOUGHT, theta. (NOTL, p. 13)

UNIVERSE 0O/W, this consists of doing an E-meter assessment of
the person on the four points (1) the thetan, (2) the mind, (3) the
body and (4) the physical universe, taking the most different
needle reaction from the rest and running what was found with
Overt-Withhold Straightwire, Ex: “Recall something you have
done to the physical universe,” alternated with “Recall some-
thing you have withheld from the physical universe.” (HCOB 5
Oct 59)

UNMOCK, 1. take down or destroy. (HCO PL 13 Jul 74 II) 2.
make nothing of. (HCOB 19 Jan 68)

UNMOTIVATED ACT, an overt act delivered in the absence of a
motivator. (COHA, p. 156)

UNREALITY, 1. the consequence and apparency of the practice
of not-isness. (Sen 0-8, p. 32) 2. a substitute of an unknown for a
known. (SH Spec 15X, 6106C15) 3. unreality is not-is-ness, our
effort trying to make something disappear, with energy. (PRO
15, 5408C20) 4. unreality is force and invalidation. (SH Spec 294,
6308C14)

UNREDUCED FACSIMILE, it is a facsimile which still has the
eapability of absorbing your attention unit output. (5206CM24B)

UNUSUAL SOLUTIONS, 1. a phrase describing actions taken by
an auditor or a case or auditing supervisor when he or she has
not spotted the gross auditing error. The “unusual solution”
seldom resolves any case because the data on which it is based
(the observation or report) is incomplete or inaccurate. (HCOB
16 Nov 64) 2. an “unusual solution” is one evolved to remedy an
abuse of existing technology. (JSE, p. 46)

UNWILLING CAUSE, if he is afraid to be at effect, then he is
unwilling cause and is at cause only because he is very afraid of
being at effect. Having to be at cause because he doesn’t dare be
at effect. (SCP, p. 9)

456
URGES

UPC, Universe Process Congress. (HCOB 29 Sept 66)

UPPER INDOCTRINATION, training processes 6 to 9. The 18th
ACC in Washington, July 8 to August 16, 1951, was taught in
three units composed as follows: communication course, upper
indoctrination course, CCH course. (HCOB 8 Jun 57)

UPPER LEVEL, is very simply defined as anything from Power
on up. (ED 110R FLAG)

UP SCALE, there is a downward spiral on the tone scale and an
upward spiral. These spirals are marked by decreasing or
increasing awareness. To go up scale one must increase his
power to observe with certainty. (COHA, p. 200)

URGES, drives, impulses. (JFR, p. 8)

457
V

VACUUM, 1. a vacuum is a supercold object which, if brought
into contact with bank, drinks bank. Objects at 25°F or less
have high electrical capacitance, low resistance. (PAB 106) 2. a
vacuum is a supercold object that attracts electronically into it,
the whole track. (PAB 97)

VALENCE, 1. a valence is an identity complete with bank mass or
mental image picture mass of somebody other than the identity
selected by oneself. In other words, what we usually mean by
valence is somebody else’s identity assumed by a person
unknowingly. (17ACC-10, 5703C10) 2. the valence mechanism
produces whole people for the preclear to be and will include
habits and mannerisms which are not mentioned in engrams but
are a result of the preclear’s compulsion to copy certain people.
(SOS, Bk. 2, p. 202) 3. a valence is a false or true identity. The
preclear has his own valence. Then there are available to him
the valences of all persons who appear in his engrams. (SOS, p.
106) 4. just an identity that is so dominant that it balls-up a
whole section of the whole track. It takes a large section of the
whole track and bundles it all up in a black ball and it’s full of
pictures. (SH Spec 105, 6201C25) 5. a valence is a substitute for

459
VALENCE BOUNCER

self taken on after the fact of lost confidence in self. (SH Spec
68, 6110C18) 6. the combined package of a personality which one
assumes as does an actor on a stage except in life one doesn’t
usually assume them knowingly. (5707C17) 7. a valence is a
commanded mimicry of another person or thing or imagined
entity. These commands would be in engrams. The valence is
not contained in a circuit. The valence and the circuit are two
different things. The valence is a whole person, a whole thing,
or a large number of persons or things. The circuit robs “I” of
attention units. The valence transplants “I.” It takes “I” and
puts him somewhere else. (NOTL, p. 82) 8. the personality of
one of the dramatic personnel in an engram. (DMSMH, p. 81) 9.
the form and identity of the preclear or another, the beingness.
(HCOB 23 Apr 69) 10. a valence is a synthetic beingness, at
best, or it is a beingness which the pc is not, but is pretending to
be or thinks he is. That beingness could have been created for
him by a duplication of an existing beingness, or a synthetic
beingness built up by the descriptions of somebody else. (SH
Spec 41, 6108C17) 11. a facsimile personality made capable of
force by the counter-effort of the moment or receipt into the
plus or minus randomity of unconsciousness. Valences are
assistive, compulsive or inhibitive to the organism. A control
center is not a valence. (Scn 0-8, p. 86) 12. there are many
valences in everyone. By a valence is meant an actual or a
shadow personality, one’s own valence is his actual personality.
(SA, p. 159) 13. valens means “powerful” in Latin. It is a good
term because it is the second half of ambivalent (power in two
directions). It is a good term because it describes the intent of
the organism when dramatizing an engram. Multivalence would
mean “many powerfuls.” It would embrace the phenomena of
split personality, the strange differences of personality in people
in one and then another situation. Valence in Dn means the
personality of one of the dramatic personnel in an engram.
(DMSMB, p. 80)

VALENCE BOUNCER, which prohibits an individual from going
into some particular valence. (SOS, p. 182)

VALENCE CASE, the schizophrenic of psychiatry, the person
who shifts from one identity to another, in Dn, we call a valence
case. (SOS, p. 75)

460
VALIDATION EFFORT PROCESSING

VALENCE CLOSURE, you snap terminals and obsessively be-
come the thing you have overts against. (SH Spec 53, 6109C13)

VALENCE DENYER, which may even deny that the person’s
own valence exists. (SOS, p. 182)

VALENCE GROUPER, which makes all valences into one va-
lence. (SOS, p. 182)

VALENCE SHIFT, pc will cognite on having been out of valence
and will return to his own valence. It’s a cognition on beingness,
not doingness or havingness. (BTB 26 Nov 71 III)

VALENCE SHIFTER, 1. a valence shifter is anything that
indicates the person should be somebody else, with such a
phrase a person is liable to shift instantly into another valence.
(NOTL, p. 110) 2. a phrase which causes the individual to shift
into another identity. The phrase “you ought to be in his shoes”
and the phrase “you’re just like your mother” are valence
shifters, which change the preclear from his own identity into
the whole identity of another person. (SOS, p. 106) 3. the phrase
known as the “valence shifter” may force the person to be in any
or every valence (grouper), or may force him to be barred out of
a valence (bouncer) so that he cannot imitate some human being
such as father, who may have had very good qualities well
worth imitating. Typical valence shifters are such phrases as
“you're just like your father,” “I'll have to pretend I'm somebody
else.” (SOS, Bk. 2, p. 201) [This term has since been used to also
denote the name of an auditing action.] 4. a list process to
handle “out of valence.” (HCOB 10 Sept 68)

VALENCE WALL, can actually exist in the individual to a point
where he can be either one of two persons, himself and another
person. In the very highly-charged case, in the case of the
obvious psychotic, these valence walls are so well defined that
the auditor can almost watch the person click from one valence
to another. (SOS, p. 75)

VALIDATION EFFORT PROCESSING, this consists of discover-
ing moments when the preclear is successfully approaching
goals, when he is successfully exerting an effort, when his
self-determined effort is winning. (65110CM01)

461
VALIDATION STRAIGHTWIRE

VALIDATION STRAIGHTWIRE, the theory of which was to
validate al] the good moments of the preclear’s past by having
him recall them. (Adi SW, p. 7)

VAMPIRE IDEA, the personality which absorbs the life and lives
on the life of others. (PAB 8)

VBIs, very bad indicators. (BTB 6 Nov 72RA IV)

VEDA, 1. we find Sen’s earliest certainly known ancestor in the
Veda. The Veda is a study of the whereins and whereases and
who made it and why. It is a religion. It should not be confused
as anything else but a religion. And the word veda simply
means: lookingness or knowingness. (PXL, p. 10) 2. veda itself
means simply knowingness or sacred lore and don’t think that is
otherwise than a synonym. Knowingness has always been
considered sacred lore. (PXL, p. 12)

VERBATIM, 1. in the same words as the text. (HCO PL 4 Mar 71)
2. word for word. (HCO PL 17 Mar 74 II)

VERY WELL DONE, 1. if the auditor did the C/S, did a correct
session, got an F/N at exam and did the admin and next C/S is
correct, then the C/S marks “very well done.” (HCOB 5 Mar 71)
2. an auditor gets a “very well done” when the session by
worksheet inspection, exam report inspection is: (1) F/N, VGIs
at examiner, (2) the auditing is totally flubless and by the book,
(3) the whole C/S ordered was done without departure and to
the expected result. (HCOB 21 Aug 70)

VGIs, 1. abbreviation for very good indicators. It means good
indicators to a very marked degree. Extremely good indicators.
(BTB 12 Apr 72R) 2. pe happy. (HCOB 20 Feb 70)

VIA, via means a relay point in a communication line. To talk via a
body, to get energy via eating alike are communication by-
routes. Enough vias make a stop. A stop is made out of vias.
(COHA, p. 108)

VICTIM, 1. a destroyed, or threatened with destruction receipt
point. (IMACC-7, 5911C12) 2. a victim is an unwilling and
unknowing effect of life, matter, energy, space and time. (HCOB
3 Sept 59)

462
VIEWPOINT PROCESSING

VIEWPOINT, 1. a point of awareness from which one can
perceive. (PAB 2) 2. that thing which an individual puts out
remotely, to look through. A system of remote lookingness—
we'll call it just remote viewpoint. That’s a specialized kind
of viewpoint. And the place from which the individual is him-
self looking, we'll call flatly a viewpoint. (2ACC 17A, 53812CM07)
3. evaluation is the reactive mind’s conception of viewpoint. The
reactive mind does not perceive, it evaluates. To the analytical
mind it may sometimes appear that the reactive mind has a
viewpoint. The reactive mind does not have a viewpoint, it has
an evaluation of viewpoint. Thus the viewpoint of the analytical
mind is an actual point from which one perceives. Perception is
done by sight, sound, smell, tactile, etc. The reactive mind’s
‘viewpoint’ is an opinion based on another opinion and upon a
very small amount of observation, and that observation would
be formed out of uncertainties. Thus the confusion of the word
viewpoint itself. It can be a point from which one can be aware,
which is its analytical definition, and it can be somebody’s ideas
on a certain subject which is the reactive definition. (COHA,
pp. 208-209)

VIEWPOINT PROCESSING, 1. this process seeks to resolve the
problems set up by the evaluation of one being for another. It
resolves in particular dependence upon people, objects, bodies
and special systems of communication. Viewpoint processing
resolves dependencies. (PAB 8) 2. what we are trying to do
here, then, is not to run out all the engrams in the bank but to
release and free the viewpoints which are being resisted. (PAB
8)

463
VIEWPOINT STRAIGHTWIRE

VIEWPOINT STRAIGHTWIRE, 1. the formula of this process is:
all the definitions and axioms, arrangements and scales of Scn
should be used in such a way as to bring about a greater
tolerance of such viewpoints on the part of the preclear. That
means that any scale there is, any arrangement of fundamentals
in thinkingness, beingness, could be so given in a straightwire
process that it would bring about a higher state of tolerance on
the part of the preclear. (PXL, p. 248) 2. this process is to
increase the preclear’s ability to tolerate views. (COHA, p. 66)

VIRUS, matter and energy animated and motivated in space and
time by theta. (Scn 0-8, p. 75)

VISIO, 1. recalling a scene by seeing it again is called in Dn visio,
by which is meant visual recall. (SOS, p. 72) 2. with visie we
perceive light waves, which, as sight, are compared with
experience and evaluated. (SOS, p. 59) 3. the ability to see in
facsimile form something one has seen earlier so that one sees it
again in the same color, dimension scale, brightness and detail
as it was originally viewed. (PX, p. 230)

VISIO IMAGERY, when a person can recall things he has seen
simply by seeing them again, in color, in his mind. (Exp Jour,
Winter-Spring, 1950)

VISIO SEMANTIC, the recordings of words read. These are
special parts of the sound and sight files. (DMSMH, p. 46)

VITAMIN E, the apparent acting of this vitamin is to oxygenate
the blood and inhibit the body from pulling in mental masses due
to oxygen-energy starvation. (HCOB 27 Dec 65)

VITAMINS, vitamins are not drugs. They are nutrition. (Aud 71
ASHO)

V UNIT, 1. in 1962 a Saint Hill Special Briefing Course unit for
co-auditing heavily supervised R2-10 or R2-12 directed toward
results. There were no checksheets beyond course regulations.
(HCO PL 8 Dec 62) 2. the purpose of V unit is to: (1) get the
student into some kind of shape to finish the SHSBC, (2) give
the student a win as an auditor, (3) establish an auditing reality
on Sen. (HCO PL 13 Feb 63)

464
W

WALKING OUT PROCESSES, type of process where the student
takes his preclear out into some populated area. (PAB 70)

WANTS HANDLED, 1. the thing (somatic, intention, terminal,
condition, doingness) the pc really wants handled. (HCOB 28
Mar 74) 2. a “wants to get rid of” not a “wants to achieve.”
(HCOB 28 Mar 74)

WANTS HANDLED RUNDOWN, an Ex Dn rundown. The
important points of the RD are to run it as a “wants to get rid
of,” not a “wants to achieve” and to complete each thing the pc
wants handled before going on. Handling of each thing the pc
wants handled is dictated by what the “thing” (somatic, inten-
tion, terminal, condition, doingness) is. (HCOB 28 Mar 74)

WAR, 1. a means of bringing about a more amenable frame of
mind on the part of the enemy. (SH Spec 63, 6506C08) 2. is the
antipathies of organization. War is chaos. (SH Spec 131,
6204C03)

WASTE-HAVE, a person can’t have something. You can have him
waste it enough and he'll find out after a while, he'll say “Well, I
can have it.” (5702C26)

465
WATERLOO STATION

WATERLOO STATION, a process where, in a populated area
(park, railroad station, etc.) you have the pc tell the auditor
something he wouldn’t mind not-knowing about persons, or the
persons not-knowing about him which auditor spots for him.
(PAB 69)

WAVB, a path of flow or a pattern of flow. (PDC 18)
WAVE-LENGTH, the relative distance from node to node in any

flow of energy. In the mest universe wave-length is commonly
measured by centimeters or meters. (Sen 8-8008, p. 18)

Wave-Length

WC (-ER) (-D) (-NG), word clear (-er) (-ed) (-ing). (BPL 5 Nov
72RA)

WCCL, Word Clearing Correction List. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)

WDAHs, well done auditing hours. (FBDL 279)

WELL DONE, 1. “well done” given by the C/S for a session
means the pe had VGIs at the examiner immediately after the
session. (HCOB 21 Aug 70) 2. is only given to those where the
session ran off like a clock exactly on standard tech. (Class VIII,
No. 2)

WELL DONE AUDITING HOURS, 1. “well done auditing hours”
is defined as number of auditing hours in the chair which are
well done by C/S grading, with F/N, VGIs at end of sesison and
examiner, to which can be added admin time up to and no higher
than 10 per cent of the actual well done hours audited. (FO 3076)
2. well done hours are defined as those hours given a well done
by the C/S—the session having concluded on F/N VGIs and the
pe having F/N VGIs at the examiner immediately after the
session, and no gross technical outnesses in the session. (HCO
PL 23 Nov 71 II)

466
WHAT?’S-IT LINE

WELL DONE BY EXAMS, if the exam form F/Ned, but the
admin is not okay and the session actions were not okay the C/S
writes “well done by exam.” (HCOB 5 Mar 71)

WFMH, World Federation of Mental Health. (Aud 71 ASHO)

WF-1, 1. why finding drill-one. (BTB 2 Sept 72R) 2. WF-2, why
finding drill-two. (BTB 2 Sept 72 II)

WH (W/H), withhold. (HCOB 23 Aug 65)

WHAT QUESTION, the formulation of the what question is done
as follows: the pc gives an overt in response to the zero question
which does not clean the needle of the instant read on the zero.
The auditor uses that overt to formulate his what question. Let
us say the zero was “Have you ever stolen anything?” The pc
says “I have stolen a car.” Testing the zero on the meter, the
auditor says “I will check that on the meter: Have you ever
stolen anything?” (He mentions nothing about cars, Heaven
forbid!) If he still gets a read, the auditor says “I will formulate
a broader question,” and says, to the meter, “What about
stealing cars? What about stealing vehicles? What about stealing
other people’s property?” the auditor gets the same zero
question read on “What about stealing other people’s property?”
So he writes this down on his report. Now as he has his
question, the auditor sits up, looks at the pe and says, meaning
it to be answered (but without accusation) “What about stealing
other people’s property?” (HCOB 24 Jun 62 Prepchecking)

WHAT’S IT, v. a coined word, coming from the phrase, “What is
it?” It basically means to ask a question. However, it has come
to mean “to dwell on problems, confusions or uncertainties
rather than to resolve them.” —z. 1. an unanswered question; a
puzzlement about something. (Scn AD) 2. the rise of the TA is a
“What’s it?” The pce’s groping (what’s it). The pe says “What’s
it?” The auditor must begin to ask occasionally “Well, what's it
seem to you?” And the pc will find his own “It’s a. . .” and the
TA will fall. (HCOB 4 Aug 63)

WHAT’S-IT LINE, 1. is from the auditor to the pc. And the
auditor is saying what’s it. (SH Spec 291, 6308C06) 2. it’s called

467
WHAT TO AUDIT

what’s it because those exact words raise the tone arm and the
itsa line is called itsa because those exact words lower the TA.
(SH Spec 294, 6808C14)

WHAT TO AUDIT, a book now called A History of Man and is a
fragmentary account of the GE line. (PDC 9)

WHITE FLOW, a white flow is a moving flow and a black area is a
stopped flow. And a black area is stopped because there’s a
white flow around there somewhere ready to run. (5207CM24B)

WHITE FORM, PC Assessment Form (HCOB 23 Aug 71)

WHOLE TRACK, the whole track is the moment to moment
record of a person’s existence in this universe in picture and
impression form. (HCOB 9 Feb 66)

“WHY”, 1. that basic outness found which will lead to a recovery
of statistics. (HCO PL 13 Oct 70) 2. the real reason found by the
investigation. (HCO PL 29 Feb 72 II)

WIDE OPEN CASE, 1. a case that has pictures and everything
and is impatient to get on with it but does not markedly alter
the bank with thinking alone. (SCP, p. 9) 2. is possessed of full
perception except somatic, which is probably light even to the
point of anesthesia. Wide open does not refer to a high tone
individual but to one below 2.5 who should be easy to work but
is often inaccessible and who finds it difficult to regain a somatic
but simple to regain perception. (AP&A, p. 40) 3. your wide
open case is somebody who has had all of his past shut off from
him and is living in a demon circuit. That’s all that’s left of him is
a demon circuit. (5206CM24F) 4. a tremendously heavily
charged track brings the individual into a psychotic level. The
inability of the mind to occlude and encyst charge gives us the
strange picture of an individual who can move on the track and
who can run through engrams and who has sonic and visio but
who is psychotic. (SOS, p. 109)

WIDE ROCK SLAM, a quarter of a dial rock slam to a full dial
rock slam. (HCOB 12 Sept 62)

WILDCAT, meaning springing up anywhere. (HCO PL 5 Oct 69)

468
WITHHOLD

WILLPOWER, in this mest universe it consists of the relative
ability to impose time and space on energy or matter. That’s
willpower and that’s self-determinism, and that is controlling
people and people controlling you. (5209CM04B)

WIN, intending to do something and doing it or intending not to
do something and not doing it. (SH Spec 278, 6306C25)

WINNING VALENCE, 1. is a synthetic valence. It is not actually
the personality of the person who won. It is the individual’s
mock-up of that person which is diminished, or augmented by
other people’s opinions and by one’s own postulates. (PAB 83)
2. in the case of the woman beaten by her husband, the engram
contains just two valences. Who won? The husband. Therefore it
is the husband who will be dramatized. She didn’t win, she got
hurt. When restimulators are present, the thing to do is to
be the winner, the husband, to talk like him, to say what
he did. Hence, when the woman is restimulated into this
engram by some action she dramatizes the winning valence.
(DMSMH, p. 81) 3. the valence of greatest determinism.
(COHA, p. 99)

WINS, if a pe is getting wins then the pc gets more able, earns
more or finds more wherewithal, and accomplishes more in a
given period of time, leaving more time to use for auditing and
the minor upsets or discomforts which accompany even the
smoothest auditing are disregarded. (BCR, p. 17)

WITH A SESSION, is defined as “interested in own case and
willing to talk to the auditor.” (HCOB 19 Aug 63)

WITHDRAWAL SYMPTOMS, the most wretched part of coming
off hard drugs is the reaction called withdrawal symptoms.
People go into convulsions. These are so severe that the addict
becomes very afraid of them and so remains on drugs. The
reaction can produce death. The theory is that withdrawal
symptoms are muscular spasms. (HCOB 5 Nov 74)

WITHHELD COGNITION, see CUT COGNITION.

WITHHOLD, 1. a withhold is an unspoken, unannounced trans-
gression against a moral code by which the person was bound.

469
WITHHOLD OF OMISSION

(SH Spec 62, 6110C04) 2. the unwillingness of the pc to talk to
the auditor or tell him something. (SH Spec 108, 6202C01) 3. a
withhold is something that a person believes that if it is revealed
it will endanger their self-preservation. (SH Spec 113, 6202C20)
4, when the person should be reaching and is withdrawing that’s
a withhold. (SH Spec 98, 6201C10) 5. a withhold is a withhold if
it is a violation of the mores the pe has subscribed to and knows
about. (SH Spec 75, 6111C02) 6. a withhold is something the pe
did that he isn’t talking about. (SH Spec 206, 6211C01) 7. a
withhold is what the pe is withholding and it does not have to
include what the pc considers is a withhold. (SH Spec 98,
6201010) 8. it is restraining self from communicating. (SH Spec
98, 6201C10) 9. is always the manifestation which comes after an
overt. Any withhold comes after an overt. (SH Spec 181,
6208C07)

WITHHOLD OF OMISSION, he should be reaching and he is not
and that’s just a withhold of omission. (SH Spec 98, 6201010)

WITHHOLDS LONG DURATION, are spotted by a nattery,
critical or hostile sort of life. The case would be anywhere from
2.2 on down to 1.0 on the tone scale. (LRH Def. Notes)

WITHHOLD SYSTEM, I have finally reduced clearing withholds
to a rote formula which contains all the basic elements necessary
to obtain a high case gain without missing any withholds. The
system has five parts: (0) the difficulty being handled, (1) what
the withhold is, (2) when the withhold occurred, (3) all of the
withhold, (4) who should have known about it. (HCOB 12 Feb
62)

WITHHOLDY CASE, routinely ARC breaking and having to be
patched up, commonly blows, has to have lots of hand-holding.
(HCO PL 5 Apr 65 II)

WITHHOLDY PC, a pe who seems to have a lot of ARC breaks,
the pe is a withholdy pe not an ARC breaky pe. Any auditor
miss causes a pc blowup. If you call such a case that ARC breaks
a lot a “withholdy pe that ARC breaks a lot” then you can solve
the case, for all you have to do is work on withholds. (HCOB 4
Apr 65)

470
WORD CLEARING METHOD ONE

WITH SCIENTOLOGY, “interested in subject and getting it
used.” (HCOB 19 Aug 63)

WOG, 1. worthy Oriental gentleman. This means a common
ordinary run-of-the-mill garden-variety humanoid. (SH Spec 82,
6611C29) 2. a wog is somebody who isn’t even trying. (SH Spec
73, 6608C02)

WOOF AND WARP, (rug terms; weaving). [Consult your regular
dictionary for full description.] (SH Spec 46, 6411010)

WORD, 1. a symbolic sound code of the physical universe in action
or in static and refers to nothing more than a condition or lack of
condition of being of the physical universe. Words are all
physical universe because they are designed to go on a physical
universe system. (5203CM07A) 2. a word is a whole package of
thought. (PRO 14, 5408C20) 3. words are only symbols which
represent actions. (SA, p. 63) 4. words are sounds in syllabic
form delivered with a definite timbre, pitch, and volume or sight
recognition in each case. Words are a highly specialized form of
audio-perceptics. The quality of the sound in uttering the word
is nearly as important as the word itself. The written word
belongs in part to visio-perceptics. (DTOT, p. 38)

WORD CLEARER, one who is qualified in and uses the techno-
logy of word clearing. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

WORD CLEARING (W/C), a technique for locating and handling
(clearing) misunderstood words. There are nine methods of
word clearing. (BTB 12 Apr 72R)

WORD CLEARING CORRECTION LIST (WCCL), used to handle
any upsets or high or low TA occurring during or shortly after
word clearing. Assessed M5. EP is all reading items handled to
F/N and pe again running well. (BTB 11 Aug 72RA)

WORD CLEARING METHOD ONE, 1. by meter in session. A full
assessment of many, many subjects is done. The auditor then
takes each reading subject and clears the chain back to earlier
words and or words in earlier subjects until he gets an F/N.
(HCOB 24 Jun 71) 2. assess, take the reading items from the
best read on down and with E/S pull each one to F/N. Get each

471
WORD CLEARING METHOD 2

word you find to F/N. There can be many F/Ns per subject.
End off with a win on the subject. (HCOB 30 Jun 71RB II) 3. the
action taken to clean up all misunderstoods in every subject one
has studied. It is done by a word clearing auditor. The result of
a properly done Method One word clearing is the recovery of
one’s education. (Aud 87 ASHO) Abbr. M1.

WORD CLEARING METHOD 2, 1. by meter in classroom. The
earlier passage is read by the student while on a meter and the
misunderstood word is found. Then it is fully defined by
dictionary. The word is then used several times in sentences of
the student’s own verbal composing. The misunderstood area is
then reread until understood. (HCOB 24 Jun 71) 2. (M2) means
word clearing Method 2. A method of locating and handling
misunderstood words, using a meter, in which the student reads
aloud from written materials and each reading word cleared.
(BTB 12 Apr 72R) 3. Method 2 is done with the pe reading the
materials aloud and each reading word is taken to F/N before
re-reading the relevant section and proceeding. (BTB 10 Oct
71R) Abbr. M2.

WORD CLEARING METHOD 3, 1. verbal in classroom. The
student says he does not understand something. The supervisor
has him look earlier in the text for a misunderstood word, gets
the student to look it up, use it verbally several times in
sentences of his own composition, then read the text that
contained it. Then come forward in the text to the area of the
subject he did not understand. (HCOB 24 Jun 71) 2. a method of
word clearing used in the classroom where the misunderstood
word is located and handled without the use of a meter. In the
study materials M3 means only word clearing Method 3. (BTB
12 Apr 72R) Abbr. M3.

WORD CLEARING METHOD 4, 1. Method 4 fishes for the
misunderstood word, finds it, clears it to F/N, looks for another
in the area until there are no more with an F/N VGIs. Then
moves to another area, handles that, eventually all misunder-
stoods that resulted in the cramming order or non-F/N student
are handled. (HCOB 22 Feb 72RA) 2. a method of word clearing
in which a meter is used to rapidly locate any misunderstoods in

472
WORD CLEARING METHOD 9

a subject or section of materials. It is used in the classroom by
the course supervisor. (BTB 12 Apr 72R) Abbr. M4.

WORD CLEARING METHOD 5, a system wherein the word
clearer feeds words to the person and has him define each. It is
called material clearing. Those the person cannot define must be
looked up. This method is the method used to clear words or
auditing commands or auditing lists. (HCOB 21 Jun 72 I) Abbr.
M5.

WORD CLEARING METHOD 6, is called key word clearing. It is
used on posts and specific subjects. The word clearer makes a
list of key (or most important) words relating to the person’s
duties or post or the new subject. The word clearer without
showing the person the definitions, asks him to define each
word. The word clearer checks the definition on his list for |
general correctness. Any slow or hesitancy or misdefinition is
met with having the person look the word up. (HCOB 21 Jun 72
II) Abbr. M6.

WORD CLEARING METHOD 7, whenever one is working with
children or foreign-language persons or semi-literates Method 7
Reading Aloud is used. The procedure is have him read aloud.
Note each omission or word change or hesitation or frown as he
reads and take it up at once. Correct it by looking it up for him
or explaining it to him. (HCOB 21 Jun 72 III) Abbr. M7.

WORD CLEARING METHOD §8, is an action used in the Primary
Rundown where one is studying study tech or where one is
seeking a full grasp of a subject. Its end product is super-
literacy. Usually an alphabetical list of every word or term in
the text of a paper, a chapter or a recorded tape is available or
provided. The person looks up each word on the alphabetical list
and uses each in sentences until he has the meaning concep-
tually. (HCOB 21 Jun 72 IV) Abbr. M8.

WORD CLEARING METHOD 9, the procedure is: (1) student or
staff member reads the text out loud. He is not on the meter. (2)
the word clearer has a copy of the text and reads along with the
student silently. (3) if the student leaves out a word or stumbles
or exhibits any physical or verbal manifestation while reading

473
WORD LIST

the text, the word clearer immediately asks for the misunder-
stood word or term and gets the meanings cleared with a
dictionary and put into sentences until the word is understood
and VGIs are present. (BTB 30 Jan 73RA II) Abbr. M9.

WORD LIST, is simply a list of words taken from a body of data.
A word list can be made for a tape lecture, a mimeo issue, a
chapter of a book, etc. The word list contains all the words listed
in alphabetical order. (BTB 6 Jan 74 III)

WORK, 1. work, in essence, is simply the handling of effort, the
use of effort. (2ACC-30B, 5312CM21) 2. is admission of inability
to play. (PDC 39)

WORKABILITY, the capability of starting, changing and stop-
ping. And the degree of capability of starting, changing and
stopping would demonstrate for this universe, workability.
(PDC 19)

WORKSHEETS, a worksheet is supposed to be the complete
running record of the session from beginning to end. (HCOB 7
May 69 VI) Abbr. W/S.

WORRIED, means he is unable to unbalance the balance between
yes and no. (PDC 15)

WORRY, 1. that’s “Was it yes?” “Was it no?” “Was it yes?” “Was
it no?” (5112CM30B) 2. contradictory engram commands which
cannot be computed. (DMSMH, p. 210)

WORSENED GRAPH, if the pc’s graph worsens, the only thing
that can worsen a pc in auditing, so that his graph worsens,
markedly in processing is an ARC break. (SH Spec 56, 6503C30)

WRAPPED AROUND A TELEGRAPH POLE, Slang. the pe who
has been so poorly audited that “auditing” has created a charged
up condition on the case or the individual is so restimulated in
his environment that the same condition occurs. In both cases
the charge which has been restimulated causes the person to get
wrapped up in his case resulting in severe upset and dispersal.
Taken from U.S. West where a tangled up man in a confused
condition was likened to a person, horse or cow who had run into

474
W UNIT

a telegraph pole and gotten wrapped around it. It infers the
situation or person needs to be untangled and straightened out.
(LRH Def. Notes)

WRONG, that which was minimal survival for the minimal
number, for the maximal number of dynamics, whichever way
you want to look at it, was wrong. (PDC 15)

WRONGNESS, always miscalculation of effort. (Scn 0-8, p. 74)

WRONG SOURCE, in the R2-12 steps opposing a wrong item.
(HCOB 3 Jan 63)

WRONG WAY, in Routine 2, listing the wrong way (using the
wrong question) you get an endless list that never completes
and won't null. You have only two list questions to use in
opposing a reliable item. These are “Who or what would oppose
a... ?” and “Who or what would a. . . oppose?” For every
reliable item there is only one of the above that is right. The
other is wrong. If it happens that you start listing the wrong
way this is because you failed to find out correctly if the RI you
were about to list an opposition list to was a terminal (pain) or
an opposition terminal (sensation). The pe said he had sensation
but actually felt pain. (HCOB 3 Jan 63)

WRONG WAY OPPOSE, in Routine 2 listing having the wording
reversed such as “Who or what would oppose a catfish?” As
different from “Who or what would a catfish oppose?” A wrong
way oppose list is of course “wrong source” as one is using
“catfish” as a terminal instead of “catfish” as an oppterm or vice
versa. (HCOB 3 Jan 63)

WRONG WHY, the incorrectly identified outness which when
applied does not lead to recovery. (HCO PL 13 Oct 70 II)

W/S, worksheet. (BTB 6 Nov 72R VII)
W.S.U., withdrawal, stop, unmock. (Class VIII, No. 19)

W UNIT, in 1962 a Saint Hill Special Briefing Course unit
specializing in the theory of the usual beginning course funda-
mentals but only GF Model Session, including mid ruds, big mid

475
W/W WOULD

ruds, and meter, TRs, havingness, and CCHs. Practical included
TRs, meter, GF Model Session only, CCHs and assist. (HCO PL
8 Dec 62)

WW, world wide. (HCO PL 4 Mar 65)
W/W WOULD, who or what would. (HCOB 238 Nov 62)

476
X

X, 1. it doesn’t mean this didn’t RS, it doesn’t mean this didn’t
RR, it means this does not produce any reaction of any kind on
the meter. (SH Spee 255, 6304C04) 2. didn’t read. (HCOB 29 Apr
69) 3. experimental. (SH Spec 235, 6302C07)

X1, code number of a process. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)
X2, code number of a process. (BTB 20 Aug 71R II)

X UNIT, in 1962 a Saint Hill Special Briefing Course unit with
theory covering everything relative to R2-12, data on mid ruds,
tiger drilling and big tiger. Practical was all R2-12 practical, any
drills omitted in W unit, tiger drilling and big tiger. (HCO PL 8
Dec 62)

477
Y

YELLOW SHEET, a sheet detailing each correction list or set of
commands which have been word cleared. It also lists the pc’s
current havingness process and the type of cans the pc uses.
(BTB 3 Nov 72R)

YELLOW TAB, a C/S must put a yellow tab marked PTS on a
PTS pe folder that stays on until the person is no longer PTS.
(HCOB 17 Apr 72)

Y UNIT, in 1962 a Saint Hill Special Briefing Course unit with
theory covering everything relative to finding goals and clear-
ing; 83GAXX, Routine 3-21 and HCOBs on wrong goals. Prac-
tical—all clearing practical, free needle etc. (HCO PL 8 Dec 62)

479
LZ,

ZERO, the proper and correct definition of zero would be:
“something which had no mass, which had no wave-length,
which had no location in space, which had no position or
relationship in time. Something without mass, meaning or
mobility. (Dn 55/, p. 28)

ZERO, zero on the tone scale is equivalent to death. An individual
with a zero tone would be dead. (DTOT, p. 59)

ZERO “written (0)”, denotes an item which simply has the
requirement of you reading, understanding and attesting in the
space opposite the item, on the checksheet. Your initials in the
space provided indicate that you have read, understood and can
apply the data concerned. (HCO PL 18 Apr 71)

ZERO A & ZERO B QUESTIONS, prepchecking. When you
obtain a generality early on after the zero question, you make it
a zero A. One asks the zero A, “Have you ever disconcerted
your mother?” The needle reacts. The auditor fishes around for
a specific other incident. Finally gets, “I used to lie to her.” So
the auditor writes a zero B, “Have you ever lied to your

481
ZERO QUESTION

mother?” And then nags away at the pc until a specific time is
recovered. When the zero B is clean, ask the zero A. (HCOB 21
Mar 62)

ZERO QUESTION, in prepchecking (prepclearing) one uses the
whole subject to be cleared as the zero question. (HCOB 1 Mar
62) See SEC CHECK FORMS, these are zero questions. (HCOB
24 Jun 62)

ZERO RATE, material which is only checked out on the basis of
general understanding. (HCOB 21 Sept 70)

ZERO RATING (0-RATING), 1. passed by proof of having read or
listened to the material (such as notes or a general verbal
statement of the subject which assures the theory examiner that
the material has been covered). (HCO PL 15 Mar 68) 2. read and
listen to the data and understanding of. (HCO PL 26 Jan 72 V)

ZOMBIE, an electric shock or neuro-surgical case. (DMSMH,
p. 286)

Z UNIT, in 1962 a Saint Hill Special Briefing Course unit with
theory covering additional clearing data, form of the course and
Sen plans. Practical was a review of drills and TRs. (HCO PL 8
Dec 62)

482
The Tone Scale

TONE SCALE EXPANDED

SERENITY OF BEINGNESS
POSTULATES
GAMES

ACTION
EXHILARATION
AESTHETIC
ENTHUSIASM
CHEERFULNESS
STRONG INTEREST
CONSERVATISM
MILD INTEREST
CONTENTED
DISINTERESTED
BOREDOM
MONOTONY
ANTAGONISM
HOSTILITY
PAIN

ANGER

HATE
RESENTMENT
NO SYMPATHY

UNEX PRESSED RESENTMENT

COVERT HOSTILITY
ANXIETY
FEAR

484

40.0
30.0
22.0
20.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
3.5
3.3
3.0
2.9
2.8
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.15
1,1
1.02
1.0

KNOW TO MYSTERY SCALE

KNOW

NOT KNOW
KNOW ABOUT
LOOK

PLUS EMOTION

MINUS EMOTION
DESPAIR .98

TERROR .96
NUMB 94
SYMPATHY 9
PROPITIATION—(HIGHER TONED-

SELECTIVELY GIVES) 8
GRIEF 5
MAKING AMENDS—(PROPITIA TION

—CAN'T W/H ANYTHING) 375
UNDESERVING 3
SELF-ABASEMENT 2
VICTIM J
HOPELESS 07
APATHY .05
USELESS 03
DYING 01
BODY DEATH 0.0
FAILURE 0.0
PITY -0.1
SHAME (BEING OTHER BODIES) -0.2
ACCOUNTABLE -0.7
BLAME—(PUNISHING OTHER

BODIES) -1.0
REGRET—(RESPONSIBILITY AS

BLAME) -1.3
CONTROLLING BODIES -1.5 EFFORT
PROTECTING BODIES -2.2
OWNING BODIES -3.0 THINK
APPROVAL FROM BODIES -3.5
NEEDING BODIES -4.0 | SYMBOLS
WORSHIPPING BODIES 5.0 EAT
SACRIFICE -6.0 SEX
HIDING -8.0 | MYSTERY
BEING OBJECTS 10.0 WAIT
BEING NOTHING -20.0 | UNCONSCIOUS
CAN'T HIDE -30.0
TOTAL FAILURE -40.0 UNKNOWABLE

L. Ron Hubbard
Founder

485
The Reference Summary

Following is a summary of all the references mentioned at the end of
each definition in this Dictionary. They are written out here in full. You
will find these very useful as a means of locating additional information
about a given word or subject in Dianetics and Scientology.

The Reference Summary provides another extremely useful service to
the student. Data about almost any area of Dianetics or Scientology can
be gotten by merely looking up the word or subject concerned in the
Dictionary and consulting those references mentioned. This serves the
purpose of a large technical cross index which can be of valuable service
to all auditors, supervisors, cramming officers, case supervisors, and
students alike.

The Reference Summary is laid out as follows. Appearing first is a
full list of the Abbreviations that are used in the references at the end of
each definition and in the Reference Summary itself.

Next is an explanation about the new and exciting LRH Definition
Notes which are fully explained under the heading LRH Definition Notes
later on.

Appearing next are full lists or explanations about the books,
booklets, DABs, Journals and articles, magazines, PABs, etc. that were
consulted for definitions. ,

You are firmly advised to consult the list of abbreviations in looking
up any references in the Dictionary or Reference Summary in order to
fully understand the Abbreviations used.

The Editors

487
Abbreviations

The following comprise the abbreviations that are used in the reference summary and
also appear at the end of each word defined in the dictionary.

AAR, All About Radiation

Abil, A bility Magazine

Abil Ma, A bility Major Magazine

Abil Mi, 4 bility Minor Magazine

Abil SW, A bility Straightwire

ACC, Advanced Clinical Course

ACSA, South African Anatomy Congress
AHD, American Heritage Dictionary

AHMC, Anatomy of the Human Mind
Congress

A&L, Axioms and Logics
AP&A, Advanced Procedures and Axioms
ASHO, American Saint Hill Organization

ASMC, Anatomy of the Spirit of Man
Congress

AUD, The Auditor Magazine

AUD ASHO, Auditor Magazine
American Saint Hill Organization

AUDC, Auditors Conference
AUD DK, Auditor Magazine Denmark
Audit, auditing
AUD Spec Iss, Auditor Magazine
Special Issue
AUD UK, Auditor Magazine
United Kingdom

B&C, Background and Ceremonies of
the Founding Church

BCR, The Book of Case Remedies
BIEM, The Book Introducing
The E-meter
BPL, Board Policy Letter
BTB, Board Technical Bulletin
C, Copy (tape)
C&A, Certificates and Awards
CDN, Child Dianetics
Cert, Certainty Magazine
CFC, Ceremonies of the Founding Church
CG&AC, The Classification Gradation

and Awareness Chart

CL., Class

Class VIH No.
tape number

CM, Copy Master (tape)

CMSCS, Control and the Mechanics of
Start Change Stop

COHA, The Creation of Human Ability

Confid, Confidential

DAB Vol. Ol, Dianetic Auditors Bulletin,
Volume IT

DASF, Dianometry Astounding
Science Fiction

, Class VIII

489
Dec Conf, December Conference Lectures
Def, Definition

DMSMH, Dianetics: The Modern Science
of Mental Health

Dn 55!, Dianetics 55!

Dn Today, Dianetics Today

DPB, The Basic Dianetic Picture Book
DTOT, Dianetics: The Original Thesis
ED Flag, Executive Directive Flag
EMD, The Book of E-meter Drills
EME, E-meter Essentials

EOS, Dianetics: The Evolution of
A Science

ESTO 3, Establishment Officer
Tape Three

Exp Jour, The Explorer's Journal

FAO, Flag Administration Organization
FBDL, Flag Bureaux Data Letter

FC, Freedom Congress

FO, Flag Order

FOT, The Fundamentals of Thought
FSO, Flag Ship Order

GAH, Scientology: Group Auditors
Handbook

GL, Glossary
Gloss, Glossary
HCL, Hubbard College Lectures

HCOB, Hubbard Communications Office
Bulletin

HCO Info Ltr, Hubbard Communications
Office Information Letter

490

HCO PL, Hubbard Communications
Office Policy Letter

HCOTB, Hubbard Communications
Office Technical Bulletin

HCOTRB, Hubbard Communications
Office Training Bulletin

HEV, Human Evaluation Course
HFP, Handbook for Preclears
HOA, Hymn of Asia

HOM, History of Man

HPC, Hubbard Professional Course
Lectures

HPC A6, Hubbard Professional Course
August 1956

HYLBTL?, Have You Lived Before
This Life?

HTLTAE, How To Live Though An
Executive

IFR, Information For Releases

ISE, Introduction to Scientology Ethics
Iss, Issue or Issued

LACC, London Advanced Clinical Course
LPLS, London Public Lecture Series

LRH Def. Notes, L. Ron Hubbard
Definition Notes

LRH ED INT, L. Ron Hubbard

Executive Directive International

Mimeo, Mimeograph or Mimeograph
Issues

MIT, Mission Into Time
No., number

NOTL, Notes on The Lectures
NSOL, Scientology A New Slant On Life
Oct Ser, October Series

OODs, Orders of the Day of the
Flagship Apollo

Op Bull, Operational Bulletin

OS, Organizational Series

PAB, Professional Auditors Bulletin
PDC, Philadelphia Doctorate Course
PIP, Printed Intensive Procedure Lectures
PLS, Public Lecture Series

POW, The Problems of Work

PRD Gloss, Special Primary Rundown
Glossary

PRO, Professional Course

PXL, The Phoenix Lectures

Reiss, Reissued

Rev, Revised

Ron’s Jour 68, Ron’s Journal 1968 (tape)
SA, Self Analysis

SC, Success Congress

Sen AD, Scientology Abridged Dictionary
Sen 0-8, Scientology 0-8

Sen 8-80, Sczentology 8-80

Sen 8-8008, Scientology 8-8008

Sen Jour, Journal of Sctentology

SCP, Scientology Clear Procedure

SH ACC, Saint Hill Advanced Clinical
Course

SHPA, Special Hubbard Professional
Auditors Course (London)

SH Spec, Saint Hill Special

SH TVD, Saint Hill Television
Demonstration

SLP, Six Levels of Processing
SMC, State of Man Congress
SO, Sea Organization

SOED INT, Sea Organization

Executive Directive International
SOS, Sczence of Survival
SPB, The Basic Scientology Picture Book
Spec Lect, Special Lecture
Spr Lect, London Spring Lectures
STCR, Scientology Twentieth Century
Religzon
STP, Standard Procedure Lectures

Sup, Supplement or Supplementary
Lecture

T 80, Technique 80 Lectures

T 88, Technique 88 Lectures

TIP, Technical Individual Program
TVD, Television Demonstration
UPC, Universe Process Congress
U.S., United States

Vol., Volume

WW, World Wide

XDN No. 1, Expanded Dianetics Tape
Number One

1, Of, W, Issue 1, 2 or 3, etc.

491
LRH Definition Notes

Many of the LRH Definition Notes have been especially defined by Ron for this
dictionary to clear up terms frequently misunderstood by students and auditors alike.

Some are notes written by Ron to auditors in response to queries about definitions
during the training of Class VI and VIII auditors aboard Flag in 1968 and 1969.

Books

Advanced Procedure and Axioms by L. Ron Hubbard. The American Saint Hill
Organization, Los Angeles, California, First Hard Cover Edition, 1971.

All About Radiation by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization World Wide,
East Grinstead, Sussex, England, 1967.

A History of Man by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard Communications Office Limited,
World Wide, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, Fifth Edition, 1965.

Background and Ceremonies by L. Ron Hubbard. The Church of Scientology of
California, Los Angeles, California, 1972.

Dianetics, The Evolution of A Science by L. Ron Hubbard. Hubbard College of
Scientology, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, 1967.

Dianetics 55! by L. Ron Hubbard. The Department of Publications World Wide, Sixth
Edition, 1968. ;

Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health by L. Ron Hubbard. The
Publications Organization World Wide, East Grinstead, Sussex, England,
Fifteenth Printing, May 1968.

Dianetics: The Original Thesis by L. Ron Hubbard. Scientology Publications Organiza-
tion, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1970.

Dianetics Today by L. Ron Hubbard. The Church of Scientology of California,
Publications Organization United States, Los Angeles, California, First Printing
1975.

Handbook for Preclears by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization,
World Wide, Edinburgh, Scotland, Fifth Edition 1968.

Have You Lived Before This Life? by L. Ron Hubbard. The American Saint Hill
Organization, Los Angeles, California,’Reprinted April 1971.

492
How To Live Though An Executive by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard College of
Scientology, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, Third Edition 1965, Reprinted
1967.

Hymn of Asta by L. Ron Hubbard. The Church of Scientology of California
Publications Organization United States, Los Angeles, California, First Printing
1974.

Introduction to Scientology Ethics by L. Ron Hubbard. The American Saint Hill
Organization, Los Angeles, California, Third Edition 1970.

Mission Into Time by L. Ron Hubbard. The American Saint Hill Organization,
Los Angeles, California, First Printing 1973.

Notes on The Lectures by L. Ron Hubbard. The American Saint Hill Organization,
Los Angeles, California, Sixth Edition, 1968.

Ole Doc Methuselah by L. Ron Hubbard. Daw Books Inc., New York, New York,
1970.

Science of Survival by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard Communications Office,
East Grinstead, Sussex, England, Ninth Printing January 1964.

Scientology A New Slant On Life by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard College of
Scientology, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, Reprinted May 1966.

Scientology: Group Auditors Handbook, taken from the works of L. Ron Hubbard,
The Hubbard Association of Scientologists International, Phoenix, Arizona, USA,
1954.

Scientology Twentieth Century Religion, The Church of Scientology World Wide,
1972.

Scientology 0-8 by L. Ron Hubbard. Scientology Publications Organization,
Copenhagen, Denmark, First Edition 1970.

Scientology 8-80 by L. Ron Hubbard. The American Saint Hill Organization,
Los Angeles, California, Reprinted 1971.

Scientology 8-8008 by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization World Wide,
Edinburgh, Scotland, Seventh Edition 1967.

Self Analysts by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization World Wide,
Edinburgh, Scotland, First Hard Cover Edition 1968.

The Creation of Human Ability by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization
World Wide, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, Reprinted 1968.

The Fundamentals of Thought by L. Ron Hubbard. The American Saint Hill
Organization, Los Angeles, California, 12th Printing 1973.

493
The Phoenix Lectures by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization World
Wide, Edinburgh, Scotland, First Edition 1968.

The Problems of Work by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Department A/S,
Copenhagen, Denmark, 11th Printing September 1972.

Booklets

Axioms and Logics by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization World Wide,
East Grinstead, Sussex, England, 1967.

Control and The Mechanics of S.C.S. by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard College of
Scientology, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, 1967.

Education and The Auditor by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard Dianetic Foundation
Inc., Wichita, Kansas, 1951.

E-meter Essentials by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard College of Scientology,
East Grinstead, Sussex, England, Third Printing, 1967.

Information For Releases, taken from the works of L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard
College of Scientology, 1967.

Scientology Abridged Dictionary, taken from the works of L. Ron Hubbard. The
American Saint Hill Organization, Los Angeles, California, Tenth Printing, April
1973.

Scientology: Clear Procedure Issue One by L. Ron Hubbard. The Department of
Publications World Wide, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, 1968.

Special Primary Rundown Glossary, Flag Publications, 1972.

The Basic Dianetics Picture Book I, taken from the works of L. Ron Hubbard. The
American Saint Hill Organization, Los Angeles, California, Second Printing,
January 1973.

The Basic Scientology Picture Book, Vol. I, taken from the works of L. Ron Hubbard.
The American Saint Hill Organization, Los Angeles, California, Second Printing
May 1972.

The Book Introducing The E-meter by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organiza-
tion World Wide, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1968.

The Book of Case Remedies by L. Ron Hubbard. The Department of Publications
World Wide, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, 1968.

The Book of E-meter Drills by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Organization World
Wide, East Grinstead, Sussex, England, 1968.

494
Dianetic Auditor Bulletins

The Dianetic Auditors Bulletins were published as an information source on
Dianetic development and research by the former Dianetic Research Foundation,
Wichita, Kansas, USA.

A Brief History of Psychotherapy by L. Ron Hubbard. The Dianetic Auditors Bulletins,
Vol. II, pages 147-149, July 1951-June 1952.

An Essay on Authoritarianism by L. Ron Hubbard. The Dianetic Auditors Bulletins,
Vol. I, pages 132-146, July 1951-June 1952.

Basic Reason—Basic Principles by L. Ron Hubbard. The Dianetic Auditors Bulletins,
Vol. II, pages 67-83, July 1951-June 1952.

Cause and Effect by L. Ron Hubbard. The Dianetic Auditors Bulletins, Vol. MU,
pages 228-239, July 1951-June 1952.

Education and The Auditor by L. Ron Hubbard. The Dianetic Auditors Bulletins,
Vol. I, pages 3-53, July 1951-June 1952.

Postulate Processing by L. Ron Hubbard. The Dianetic Auditors Bulletins, Vol. II,
pages 164-173, July 1951-fune 1952.

Self-Determined Effort Processing by L. Ron Hubbard. The Diéanetic Auditors
Bulletins, Vol. 11, pages 99-105, July 1951-June 1952.

Articles and Scientology Journals

Dianometry, Your A bility and State of Mind by L. Ron Hubbard. Astounding Science
Fiction, Vol. XLVI No. 5, pages 76-100, January 1951.

Terra Incognita: The Mind by L. Ron Hubbard. The Explorers Journal, Vol. XXVIII
No. 1, Winter-Spring 1950.

Journal of Scientology, articles by L. Ron Hubbard. The Hubbard Association of
Scientologists, Phoenix, Arizona, Issues 1G-43G, September 1952 to December
1954.

Magazines

Ability Magazine is the official publication of Dianetics and Scientology in the Eastern
United States. Published by the Hubbard Scientology Organization in Washington,
D.C. A bility Straightwire was part of the A bélzty magazine series numbered A bility
Major 5, 1955.

495
The Auditor. This is the monthly journal of Scientology. These are noted in the —

reference as to whether they are United Kingdom, Publications Organization
Denmark or American Saint Hill Organization Issues.

Certainty Magazine is the official periodical of Dianetics and Scientology in the British

Isles.

Reality Magazine is the official publication of the Church of Scientology of

Los Angeles.

Professional Auditor Bulletins

Professional Auditor’s Bulletins by L. Ron Hubbard. The Publications Department
Advanced Organization Saint Hill, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1973, Nos. 1-160,
May 1953 to May 1959.

Hubbard Communications Office Bulletins

(also Board Technical Bulletins)
14 Jul 56 A Rule Has Showed Up...
20 Aug 56 HGC Procedure of August 20
3 Sept 56 Briefing Bulletin Staff and Seminar Leaders Games Congress,
Shoreham Hotel 31 Aug-3 Sept 56
HCOTB
12 Sept 56 Executives in Washington and London...
4 Oct 56 High School Indoctrination
26 Oct 56 HPA-HCA Training Processes
HCOTB
6 Feb 57 The following procedure...
10 Apr 57 To: Director of Training
The HPA/HCA Full Course Must Teach Entirely. . .
3 May 57 Training — What It Is Today
How We Tell People About It
8 Jun 57 The Teaching of the 18th ACC

496
11 Jun 57 Training and CCH Processes

Reissued
12 May 72
9 Sept 57 Processes to be Run on HGC Preclears from this date
HCOTRB
24 Sept 57 Curriculum of CCH
29 Oct 57 A Basic Chart of Process Types
2 Nov 57RA An Objective Rundown
Revised
10 May 74
22 Feb 75
16 Dec 57 Present Time Problem
1 Feb 58 Clearing of Fields
2 Apr 58 ARC in Comm Course
8 Apr 58 Auditing the PC on Clear Procedure
2 May 58 Beingness Again
29 May 58 Special Bulletin. Standard Clear Procedure
and an Experimental Road: Clearing by Valences
28 Jul 58 Clear Procedure
29 Jul 58 The Rock
6 Dec 58 How to Run an Engram
7 Dec 58 Training Drill — Changes
16 Dec 58 Extension Course Curriculum
17 Dec 58 Auditing ARC Breaks on Registrar and Assistant Registrar
Issue II
26 Dec 58 B. Scn/HCS Course
3 Feb 59 Flattening a Process
16 Feb 59 HGC Processes for those trained in Engram Running
or trained in these Processes
28 Feb 59 Analysis of Cases
1 Mar 59 Two Rules for Happy Living
Issue II
17 Mar 59 Do It Yourself Therapy
Issue IT

497
25 Mar 59
23 Apr 59
7 May 59
26 May 59
3 Jul 59
9 Jul 59
22 Jul 59
7 Aug 59

5 Sept 59
29 Sept 59
29 Sept 59

5 Oct 59
12 Nov 59

4 Dec 59
31 Dec 59

8 Jan 60

14 Jan 60
21 Jan 60
21 Jan 60
24 Jan 60

4 Feb 60

6 Feb 60
Reissued
3 Sept 74 as a BTB

11 Feb 60
25 Feb 60
9 Mar 60

17 Mar 60
24 Mar 60
30 Mar 60

498

HAS Co-Audit and Comm Course
Definitions

New Process Theory

“Man Who Invented Scientology”

General Information

Magazine Article— Definition of Scientology
Actual Working Definition of Psychology

The Handling of Communication Processes —
Some Rapid Data

Why “Victim” Works as a Process
The Organization of a PE Foundation
Universe Processes

Universe Processes

Acknowledgements in Auditing
Allowed Processes Ist Melbourne ACC
Blow-Offs

OT Procedures for HCS/BScn Courses
as Recorded in Washington DC Academy
January 1960 LRH Tapes.

The Black Case

Responsibility

Justification

OT Procedure

Overt Manifestations on a Low Toned Case

Effect Scale

Create and Confront
The Model Session

Expansion of OT-3A Procedure
Step Two—HGC Allowed Processes

Standardized Sessions
Goals in the Rudiments

Interrogation
31 Mar 60
21 Apr 60
30 Apr 60
5 May 60
12 May 60
22 May 60
26 May 60
28 May 60
10 Jun 60
16 Jun 60
4 Aug 60

25 Aug 60
Issue II

26 Aug 60
1 Sept 60
29 Sept 60
17 Nov 60
1 Dec 60
22 Dec 60
12 Jan 61
25 Jan 61
28 Jan 61
23 Feb 61
21 Mar 61
23 Mar 61
6 Apr 61
11 Apr 61
27 Apr 61

30 Apr 61R
Revised

25 Nov 73
Reissued

19 Sept 74

13 May 61

The Present Time Problem
Pre-Session Processes

ACC TRs

Help

Help Processing
De-Certification —How You Should Support It
Security Checks

By their actions...

What we Expect of a Scientologist
Hints on Running Cases with Help
Regimen 1

New Definition of Psychosis

Regimen Two

Presession IT

Havingness and Duplication
Starting Cases

New Formulas

O-W a Limited Theory
New Help Data

Handling of Rudiments
New Assessment Scale

PT Problem and Goals
Script of a Model Session
SOP Goals

S.O.P. Goals— Goals Assessment Problems Sorted Out
SOP Goals Errors

Change Processes

Change Brackets and Commands

Assessing for SOP Goals Improved
499
19 May 61
23 May 61
5 Jun 61
8 Jun 61
12 Jun 61
6 Jul 61
13 Jul 61

28 Sept 61
17 Oct 61
19 Oct 61
2 Nov 61
7 Nov 61
9 Nov 61

20 Nov 61
3 Dec 61
14 Dec 61
21 Dec 61
1 Feb 62
8 Feb 62
12 Feb 62
1 Mar 62
8 Mar 62
15 Mar 62
21 Mar 62
11 Apr 62
3 May 62
14 May 62
24 May 62
25 May 62

500

Urgent Assessment Data
Pre-Hav Scale Revised
Processes Allowed

E-Meter Watching

The Rising Needle: Skip It!
Routine 1A

Change Processing and CCHs
Clarification of Change Processing

HCO WW Security Forms 7A and 7B
Problems Intensives

Security Questions Must be Nulled
The Prior Confusion

Routine 3A

The Problems Intensive
Use of the Prior Confusion

Routine 3D Commands

Running 3D Levels

Rudiments Modernized

Model Session Script Revised

Flows, Basic

Urgent, Missed Withholds

How to Clear Withholds and Missed Withholds
Prepchecking: A Class II Skill

The Bad “Auditor”

Suppressors

Prepchecking Data When to do A What
Determining What to Run

ARC Breaks— Missed Withholds

Case Repair

Q&A

E-Meter Instant Reads
14 Jun 62
23 Jun 62
24 Jun 62

29 Jun 62
Reissued
28 Jun 74 as BIB

2 Jul 62
3 Jul 62
4 Jul 62

12 Jul 62
Reissued
9 Jul 74 as BTB

1 Aug 62
30 Aug 62
12 Sept 62
19 Sept 62

27 Sept 62
15 Oct 62

17 Oct 62

7 Nov 62
Issue II

7 Nov 62
Issue III

8 Nov 62
12 Nov 62

17 Nov 62
23 Nov 62

24 Nov 62

Checking Needle in Rudiments Checks
Model Session Revised

Prepchecking

How to Acknowledge

Repetitive Rudiments, How to Get the Rudiments In
Repetitive Prepchecking
Bulletin Changes

Motivatorish Cases

Routine 3GA Goals. Nulling by Mid Ruds
Order of Prepcheck Buttons
Security Checks Again

3GA Tips on Dynamic Assessment
Rules of Thumb

Problems Intensive Use

Goal Finders Model Session

Auditor Failure to Understand

Routine 3-21 The Twenty-One Steps
Finding Goals

“Roll Your Own” Prehav

Somatics— How to Tell Terminals and Opposition Terminals

Dirty Needles and Incomplete Lists
How to Assess

Routine 3-21

Urgent Routine Two Twelve
Opening Procedure by Rock Slam
An HPA/HCA Skill

Routine 2-12 List One Issue One
The Scientology List

501
29 Nov 62 Routines 2-12, 3-21 and 3GAXX
Tiger Drill for Nulling by Mid Ruds

5 Dec 62 2-12, 3GAXX, 3-21 and Routine 2-10 Modern Assessment
6 Dec 62 R2-10, R2-21 and Routine 2-10 Modern Assessment
6 Dec 62 R2-10, R2-12, 3GAXX Data, The Zero

A Steps and Purpose of Processes

30 Dec 62 Urgent — Important — Routines 2-12 and 2-10—
Case Errors— Points of Greatest Importance

3 Jan 63 Routine 2. Important
Opposition Lists
Right and Wrong Oppose

27 Jan 63 Urgent Routine 2—Simplified
22 Feb 63° Routine 3-M— Rundown by Steps.
4 Mar 63 Urgent Routine 2-10, 2-12, 2-12A
8 Mar 63 Use of the Big Middle Rudiments
14 Mar 63 Urgent — Routine-2— Routine 3
ARC Breaks, Handling Of
18 Mar 63 R2-R3. Important Data
Don't Force the PC
30 Mar 63 Urgent Urgent Urgent Affects Every Case Being Cleared
Routine 3-M Simplified
6 Apr 63 R-3M2— What You are Trying to Do in Clearing
8 Apr 63 Urgent — Listing and Nulling
13 Apr 63 Routine 2-G, Original Routine 2, 3GA, 2-10, 2-12, 2-12A

and Others Specially Adapted
Goals Finding Designation of Routines

24 Apr 63 Routine 3-M2
Tips
The Rocket Read of a Reliable Item
25 Apr 63 Meter Reading TRs
8 May 63 Routine 3— The Nature of Formation of GPM
15 May 63 The Time Track and Engram Running by Chains— Bulletin 1
8 Jun 63 The Time Track and Engram Running by Chains— Bulletin 2

502
24 Jun 63 Routine 3— Engram Running by Chains Bulletin 3

25 Jun 63 Routine 2H
ARC Breaks by Assessment
1 Jul 63 Routine 3R — Bulletin 4
Preliminary Step
5 Jul 63 CCHs Rewritten
9 Jul 63 A Technical Summary
The Required Skills of Processing And Why
21 Jul 63 Co-Audit ARC Break Process
22 Jul 63 You Can Be Right
28 Jul 63 Time and the Tone Arm
4 Aug 63 All Routines E-Meter Errors
Communication Cycle Error
9 Aug 63 Definition of Release
19 Aug 63 Scientology Two—Starrated HCO Bulletin
How to do an ARC Break Assessment
20 Aug 63 Scientology Three & Four R3R-R3N
The Preclear’s Postulates
22 Aug 63 Tech Preparation for HCO Pol Ltr 21 Aug AD 13 — Project 80
The Itsa Line and Tone Arm
1 Sept 63 Scientology Three — Clearing — Clearing — Clearing —
Routine Three SC
9 Sept 63 Repetitive Rudiments and Repetitive Prepchecking
12 Sept 63R CCHs, Data

Revised & Reissued
7 Sept 74 as BTB

22 Sept 63 Scientology Two Prepcheck Buttons
25 Sept 63 Scientology I to IV
Adequate Tone Arm Action
28 Sept 63 Scientology Four Important Actual Goals
1 Oct 63 Scientology All
How to Get Tone Arm Action
16 Oct 63 R3SC Slow Assessment

503
17 Oct 63R R-2C Slow Assessment by Dynamics
Revised & Reissued
1 Aug 74 as BTB

26 Nov 63 All Levels Star Rating— A New Triangle,
Basic Auditing, Technique, Case Analysis
14 Dec 63 Case Analysis Health Research
28 Dec 63 Routine VI Indicators Part One: Good Indicators
7 Apr 64 All Levels Q & A
13 Apr 64 Scientology VI— Part I Glossary of Terms
13 Apr 64 Scientology VI—Part I Tone Arm Action
23 Apr 64 Scientology III Auditing by Lists
29 Jun 64 Scientology II to IV (Star Rated in all Academies & Saint Hill)
Central Org & Field Auditor Targets
8 Jul 64 Scientology VI
Issue II Good Indicators
10 jul 64 Overts— Order of Effectiveness in Processing
12 Jul 64 More on O/ Ws
24 Jul 64 Scientology III & IV
TA Counters, Use of
14 Aug 64 Model Session Levels III to VI
Session Preliminaries
14 Aug 64 Scientology Two Prepcheck Buttons
17 Aug 64 R6 Co-Auditing
The Processing of End Words Only
18 Aug 64 | Clay Table Work Covering Clay Table Clearing in Detail
7 Sept 64 All Levels— PTPs, Overts and ARC Breaks
Issue II:
8 Sept 64 Overts, What Lies Behind Them
9 Sept 64 Level III— Clay Table Healing
27 Sept 64 Clay Table Clearing
17 Oct 64 Clearing Why it Works How it is Necessary
Issue ITI
6 Nov 64 Styles of Auditing
12 Nov 64 Scientology II PC Level 0-IV

Definition Processes

504
16 Nov 64

8 Dec 64
10 Dec 64
11 Dec 64

4 Jan 65
25 Jan 65

4 Mar 65R

Revised & Reissued
10 Aug 74

as BTB

5 Mar 65

29 Mar 65
2 Apr 65
4 Apr 65
7 Apr 65

27 Apr 65

10 May 65

11 May 65
1 Jun 65
4 Jun 65

28 Jun 65

30 Jun 65

12 Jul 65
2 Aug 65
3 Aug 65
5 Aug 65
6 Aug 65

23 Aug 65

30 Aug 65

13 Sept 65

21 Sept 65

Scientology HI & IV
Clay Table Label Goofs

Scientology VI—Solo Auditing and R6EW Solo Auditing
Listen Style Auditing

Scientology 0 Processes .

Scientology VI, REEW, R6EWS, R6BEWP—R6EW Correction
Definitions — Definition of a Terminal

Level 0 Materials

Scientology VI—R6EW Goof
A Review of R6EEW

All Levels ARC Breaks

All Scientology - The Road to Clear

ARC Breaks and Missed Withholds

Level One — Premature Acknowledgements
Clay Table Healing Goof

The Power Processes

The Power Processes

Power Processes

Class II Model Session

Releases Different Kinds

Release, Rehabilitation of Former Releases
& Thetan Exteriors

States of Being Attained by Processing
Release Goofs

Auditing Goofs Blowdown Interruption
Release Stages

Qualifications Technical Actions
Abbreviation and Symbols of Dn and Scn
Art

Out Tech and How to Get it In

Out Tech
505
22 Sept 65 Release Gradation
New Levels of Release

29 Sept 65 Cyclical and Non-Cyclical Processes
29 Sept 65 The Continuing Overt Act
Issue IT
1 Oct 65R Mutter TR
Revised
24 Feb 75
8 Nov 65 Suppressives and Hidden Standards
14 Nov 65 Clearing Commands
24 Nov 65 Search and Discovery
1 Dec 65 CCHs
27 Dec 65 Vitamins
5 Feb 66 Level III—S & D Warning
9 Feb 66 Release Grades
12 Feb 66 The Dangerous Auditor
21 Feb 66 Scientology II/PC Level 0-IV
Definition Processes
3 Apr 66 Tech Div—Dianetic Auditing Course
20 Sept 66 Minus Scale Releases ARC Straightwire Dianetic
21 Sept 66 ARC Break Needle .
23 Sept 66 Secret
29 Sept 66 Library Record of Levels
19 Jan 67 Manifestations of Engrams and Secondaries Further Defined
22 Mar 67 Important - Admin Know-How
Alter-Is and Degraded Beings
18 Apr 67 Religious Philosophy & Religious Practice
19 Aug 67 The Supreme Test
9 Oct 67R Assists for Injuries
Revised
18 Feb 74 as BTB
11 Oct 67 Clay Table Training

506
9 Nov 67

13 Jan 68
16 Jan 68
19 Jan 68
18 Apr 68
7 May 68

20 May 68
Corrected &
Reissued

5 Mar 74

24 May 68

6 Jun 68R
Revised & Reissued
1 Dec 74 as BTB

1 Aug 68
6 Aug 68
23 Aug 68

28 Aug 68
Issue II

10 Sept 68
20 Sept 68

23 Sept 68
Reissued
23 Jan 72

23 Sept 68
Issue III

27 Sept 68
Issue II

5 Oct 68

14 Oct 68
Issue II

16 Oct 68

Review Auditors — Book of Case Remedies
Revision of Remedy A, Remedy B, and S & D's

S & D’s

Starting of Preclears

S& D's

Needle Reactions Above Grade IV
Upper Indoc TRs

Overt-Motivator Sequence — Dianetics Courses —
Level Two—Solo Audit— OT Sections

Coaching

Integrity Processing Series 16R
Integrity Processing Info

The Laws of Listing and Nulling
Level II1I— Important —Star Rated R3H
Arbitraries

Drugs

“Standard” Tech Data

Glee

Drugs and Trippers

Resistive Cases Former Therapy

ARC Straightwire

ARC Break Needle
The Definition Of...

Supervisor's Duty

507
21 Oct 68

] Nov 68
Issue II

5 Dec 68
26 Dec 68
3 Feb 69
12 Mar 69
17 Mar 69

2 Apr 69
Revised
14 May 69

5 Apr 69
6 Apr 69

6 Apr 69
Issue II

17 Apr 69
22 Apr 69
23 Apr 69

24 Apr 69R
Revised & Reissued
8 Sept 74 as BTB

26 Apr 69
28 Apr 69
29 Apr 69
30 Apr 69

1 May 69

6 May 69R
Issue II
Revised & Reissued
10 Jun 74 as BTB

7 May 69
Issue V

508

Floating Needle

Overt-Motivator Definitions

Unresolving Cases

The Third Party Law

Triple Grade Flows

Physically Ill PCs and Pre-OTs (with a note on drugs)
Politics

Dianetic Assists

New Preclears— The Workability of Scientology
Fundamental Auditing

Dianetics Course Auditing Requirements

Dianetic Case Supervision
Dianetics vs. Scientology
Dianetics— Basic Definitions

Preclear Assessment Sheet

Somatics

High TA in Dianetics
Assessment and Interest
Auditor Trust
Grinding Out Engrams

Routine 3R Revised
Engram Running by Chains

Floating Needle
7 May 69
Issue VI

9 May 69
Issue II

11 May 69
Issue II

13 May 69

14 May 69
Issue II

15 May 69
17 May 69
19 May 69

19 May 69
Revised
22 Jul 69

20 May 69
21 May 69
23 May 69

24 May 69
25 May 69
23 Jun 69

10 Jul 69
Reissued
26 Jun 74 as BTB

16 Jul 69
19 Jul 69
22 Jul 69
2 Aug 69
9 Aug 69
15 Aug 69

Summary of How to Write an Auditor’s Report,
Worksheets and Summary Report,
With Some Additional Information

Case Supervisor Forms
Forcing a PC

Peculiarities

F/N and Erasure

Dirty Needle
TRs and Dirty Needles
Drug and Alcohol Cases Prior Assessing

Health Form, Use Of
A Brief Description of Auditing

Keeping Dianetics Working in an Area
Assessment

Auditing out Sessions
Narrative vs. Somatic Chains

The Difficult Case
High TA Assessment
F/N

Stenographic Auditing

Urgent - Important

Dianetics and IIness

Pastoral Counseling Health Form
LX Lists

Case Folder Analysis, Dianetics

Flying Ruds

509
16 Aug 69 Handling Illness in Scientology

14 Sept 69 Learning Processes— Education by Evaluation of Importance
Issue I
Reissued
4 Jul 74 as BTB
3 Oct 69R Dianetic Remedies
Issued
28 Mar 74 as BTB
Revised
10 Jun 74
5 Oct 69 Triple Flows
12 Oct 69 Dianetic Triples Plural Item
17 Oct 69 Drugs, Aspirin, & Tranquilizers
23 Nov 69R Student Rescue Intensive
Issue III
Revised
26 Jun 73
3 Jan 70 Triple Errors in Dianetics
15 Jan 70 The Uses of Auditing
15 Jan 70 Handling with Auditing
Issue II
27 Jan 70 Narrative Items Explained
29 Jan 70 Null Lists in Dianetics
13 Feb 70 High TA, Full Handling Of
20 Feb 70 Floating Needles and End Phenomena
26 Feb 70 Standard Tech and Invalidation
27 Feb 70 Group Engram Process
10 Mar 70 List of Perceptics
Dianetics Bulletin
20 Mar 70 Ally, Definition Of
5 May 70 Group Engram Intensive Warning
Hidden Overts
20 May 70 TR 103, 104 Rundown
Issued
28 Mar 74 as BTB
27 May 70 Unreading Questions and Items

510
28 May 70 Correction Lists, Use Of

30 May 70 Interiorization Intensive 2 Way Comm
12 Jun 70 Programming of Cases
13 Jun 70 Hubbard Consultant Study Stress Analysis
Issue II
14 Jun 70 The Return Program
15 Jun 70 C/S Series No. 5
Repair Example
16 Jun 70 C/S Series No. 6
Corrected & What the C/S is Doing
Reissued
3 Oct 71
19 Jun 70 C/S Series No. 8
Issue II Chart of Human Evaluation
25 Jun 70 C/S Series No. 12
Issue II Glossary of C/S Terms
25 Jun 70 C/S Series No. 11
23 Jun 70R Fishing A Cognition
Issue II

Revised & Reissued
14 Aug 74 as BTB

30 Jun 70R C/S Series 13R
Revised VII Actions (GF 40, [IV Rundown, VIII Case Supervision)
6 Mar 73
14 Jul 70 Solo Cans
15 Jul 70 Unresolved Pains

Corrected &
Revised 25 Nov 70

16 Jul 70 The Psychiatrist at Work

9 Aug 70R Dianetic Student Rescue Intensive
Issued
28 Mar 74 as BTB
Revised
10 Jun 74

16 Aug 70 Getting the F/N to the Examiner
Corrected &
Reissued 3 Nov 70

511
20 Aug 70R
Revised & Reissued
19 Aug 74 as BTB

20 Aug 70
21 Aug 70

26 Aug 70

28 Aug 70RA
Revised
30 May 73
Revised
9 Oct 74

21 Sept 70
6 Oct 70
8 Oct 70

22 Oct 70
Issue IT
Reissued

28 Jun 74 as BTB

26 Oct 70
Issue II
Reissued
8 Jun 74 as BTB

28 Nov 70

1 Dec 70R
Revised & Reissued
27 Jul 74 as BTB

2 Dec 70

10 Dec 70 Iss I

512

Two Complete Differences
Assessment — Listing-Nulling

Exteriorization Rundown Musts

C/S Series 16
Session Grading, Well Done, Definition Of

C/S Series No. 17
Incomplete Cases

HC Out-Point Plus-Point Lists RA

Study Series No. 1
Study Definitions

C/S Series 19
Folder Error Summaries

C/S Series No. 20
Persistent F/N

“No Overts” Case

Definition of a Student

C/S Series No. 22
Psychosis

Dianetics— Triple Flow Action

C/S Series No. 23
Exteriorization Summary

Clay Table Work in Training
10 Dec 70R
Revised & Reissued
10 Aug 74 as BTB

11 Dec 70
4 jan 71

Revised & Reissued
3 Oct 71

8 Jan 71R
Revised & Reissued
18 Jun 74 as BTB

7 Feb 71
Reissued
16 Jul 74 as BTB

28 Feb 71

5 Mar 71

6 Mar 71 Iss I

7 Mar 71
Reissued
13 Jan 75

8 Mar 71

14 Mar 71R
Corrected &
Revised

25 Jul 73

14 Mar 71R

Issue II

Revised & Reissued
18 Dec 74 as BTB

19 Mar 71
19 Mar 71

The Learning Drill

Management Power Rundown

Exteriorization and High TA

Auditing C/S 1
For Dianetics and Scientology

Administrative Training Drills
Admin TRs

C/S Series No. 24
Important — Metering Reading Items

C/S Series No. 25
The Fantastic New HGC Line

C/S Series No. 26
New Uses for the Green Form

C/S Series No. 28RA-1
Use of Quadruple Dianetics

C/S Series No. 29

Case Actions, Offline
F/N Everything

Talking the TA Down

List-1-C —L1C

C/S Series No. 30
C/Sing-Auditor C/Ses

513
27 Mar 71

4 Apr 71-1R
Addition of

13 Jan 75
Revised
22 Feb 75

5 Apr 71
Reissued
13 Jan 75

11 Apr 71RA
Revised
8 Mar 74

21 Apr 71RB
Revised
8 Apr 74
Reissued
21 Sept 74

26 Apr 71
Issue I

26 Apr 71
Issue II

27 Apr 71
30 Apr 71
19 May 71

23 May 71
Issue III
Reissued

1 Dec 74

23 May 71R
Issue IV
Revised

4 Dec 74

26 May 71

514

Dianetic Erasure

C/S Series No. 32RA-1R
Use of Quad Dianetics

C/S Series 33RA-1
Triple and Quad Reruns

Important —L3RD
Dianetics and Int RD Repair List

C/S Series No. 36RB
Dianetics

TRs and Cognitions
Solo Cognitions

Education, Definition Of
Auditing Comm Cycle

C/S Series No. 37
High TAs are Overruns and Int RD Handling

Basic Auditing Series 3
The Three Important Communication Lines

Basic Auditing Series 4R
Communication Cycles within the Auditing Cycle

C/S Series No. 38
TRs Course and Auditing
Mixing Major Actions
2 Jun 71
Issue I
Corrected &
Reissued
30 Dec 72

3 Jun 71

8 Jun 71
Issue II
9 Jun 71
Issue I
10 Jun 71
Issue I
16 Jun 71RA
Issue I
Revised
30 May 73
Reissued
27 Jul 74 as BTB

16 Jun 71R
Issue II
Revised

30 May 73
Reissued

22 Jul 74 as BIB

16 Jun 71RA

Issue III

Revised
10 Apr 72

Revised & Reissued
11 Jun 74 as BTB

17 Jun 71
19 Jun 71 Iss II

19 Jun 71 Iss III
21 Jun 71 Iss I

Study Series No. 2
Confronting

C/S Series No. 37R Revised
High and Low TA Breakthrough

Flag OT Executive Rundown

C/S Series No. 41
C/S Tips

C/S Series No. 44R
C/S Rules

Rapid TR-2

Advanced E-Meter Drills

The “Ideal Session Start” Drill

The New Life Rundown L-9S

C/S Series No. 46
Declares

Study Definitions for the TR Course

Affinity, Reality, and Communication

515
24 Jun 71
26 Jun 71

30 Jun 71R Iss II
Revised 9 Aug 71
Revised 11 May 72

3 Jul 71

5 Jul 71R
Revised & Reissued
8 Jun 74

17 Jul 71
19 Jul 71

23 Jul 71
Corrected
4 May 72
27 Jul 71RA
Issue I
Revised & Reissued
20 Nov 74 as BTB

4 Aug 71R
Revised
26 Nov 74

8 Aug 71

27 Jul 71
Issue II
Revised & Reissued
9 Jul 74 as BIB
16 Aug 71R
Revised & Reissued
31 Jul 74 as BTB
16 Aug 71
Issue IT

516

Word Clearing Series No. 2
Word Clearing

C/S Series No. 37R
Addition 3

Word Clearing Series 8RB

Scientology II
Auditing by Lists Revised

C/S Series No. 49R
Assists

C/S Series No. 51
Out of Valence

C/S Series No. 52
Internes

Assists— A Flag Expertise Subject

Important — Allow No Bugs on Word Clearing Procedure

Post Purpose Clearing

C/S Series No. 55
The Ivory Tower

Word Clearing Series 14
EP of Word Clearing

Breakthrough TR Course

Training Drills Modernized
18 Aug 71R
Revised & Reissued
24 Aug 74 as BTB

20 Aug 71R

Issue IT

Revised & Reissued
14 Jan 75 as BTB

23 Aug 71

1 Sept 71 Iss I

4 Sept 71 Iss ITI

6 Sept 71

7 Sept 71

8 Sept 71
22 Sept 71

23 Sept 71
Reissued
27 Aug 74 as BTB

24 Sept 71

30 Sept 71
Issue IV
Reissued
1 Jul 74 as BIB

30 Sept 71
Issue V

5 Oct 71

8 Oct 71
Issue II

8 Oct 71
Issue III

TR Course— How to Run

Classification and Gradation Chart
Abbreviations Explained

C/S Series No. 1
Auditors Rights

C/S Series No. 57
A C/S as a Training Officer
A Program for Flubless Auditing

Word Clearing Series No. 20
Simple Words

Word Clearing Series No. 21
Correct Sequence Qualifications of Word Clearers

C/S Series No. 58
Programming Cases Backwards

Case Supervisor Actions
The Three Golden Rules of the C/S

Solo Folder Summary

Urgent — Interiorization Rundown

Auditing

Co-auditing — Drill-Model Session for CCHs 1 to 4

F/Ning Auditors

Solo C/S Series No. 5
The Scene

Solo C/S Series No. 6

Separation of Training and Materials

517
9 Oct 71RA Auditors Drills Series No. 2
Issue II Level 0 Process Drills
Revised

21 Jul 73
Revised & Reissued
29 Jul 74 as BTB

9 Oct 71RA Auditor Drills Series No. 3RA
Issue III Level 1 Process Drills
Revised & Reissued

10 Jun 74 as BTB

Revised
21 Feb 75
BTB 9 Oct 71R Auditor Drills Series No. 7
Issue VII Drills for Auditor
Revised Dianetic Drills
28 Mar 74
10 Oct 71R Word Clearing Series 28R

Revised & Reissued Tech Points on a Word Clearing Festival
31 Jul 74 as BTB

22 Oct 71 Exteriorization
Reissued

19 Sept 74

23 Oct 71R Personnel Programming Series 6R
Issue V Personnel Programmer Ethics

Revised & Reissued Intervention Rights
28 Jul 74 as BIB

24 Oct 71 False TA

25 Oct 71R The Special Drug Rundown
Issue II
Revised
26 Aug 72
Revised
30 Jun 74
Reissued
29 Aug 74 as BTB

29 Oct 71R Int RD Correction List Revised
Revised
14 May 74

30 Oct 71 Triple Grades vs. Expanded

518
20 Nov 71
Revised
24 Mar 72

21 Nov 71
Issue I

22 Nov 71 Issue II
Reissued
1] Aug 74 as BTB

24 Nov 71
Issue II
Reissued
3 Jul 74 as BTB

25 Nov 71
Issue II
Reissued

21 Sept 74

26 Nov 71
Issue III
Reissued
9 Sept 74 as BTB

1 Dec 71R
Issue IV

Revised & Reissued

24 Jul 74 as BTB

1 Dec 71RB
Issue II
Revised

6 Jan 75

4 Dec 71R
Issue I

Revised & Reissued

5 Aug 74 as BTB

9 Dec 71RA
Revised
21 Oct 74

12 Dec 71R

Revised & Reissued

1 Aug 74 as BTB

HAS Specialist and Establishment Officer
Auditing Program (Revised)

Important — Tape Course Series No. 2
Dianetics and Scientology in Other Languages

Tape Course Series No. 5
Tape Players— Description and Care

Tape Course Series No. 7

Course Materials

Resistive Cases Former Therapy

Out of Valence — 220H

Effort Processing

Triple Ruds Long Duration

PTS Rundown

C/S Series No. 69R
Mandatory C/Sing Checklist

519
12 Dec 71

Issue IV
Revised & Reissued

2 Jul 74 as BTB
12 Dec 71

Issue 1X

16 Dec 71RA

Revised

19 Sept 74

17 Dec 71R
Revised
30 Mar 74

23 Dec 71

1 Jan 72RA

20

Revised & Reissued
as HCOB
Nov 74

7 Jan 72

7

Feb 72RA
Issue II
Revised & Reissued

29 Jul 74 as BTB

19
22

26

Revised
Dec 74

Feb 72RA
Revised
Mar 72 &

8 Jul 74

22

Mar 72R
Revised

12 Jul 73

Reissued

6 Jul 74 as BTB

27

520

Mar 72R
Issue II
Revised 3 Dec 74

The Comm Cycle in Solo Auditing

Lock Scanning for the Solo Auditor’s Course

C/S Series 35RA
Interiorization Errors

C/S Series 23RA
Interiorization Summary

Solo C/S Series 10—C/S Series No. 73
The No-Interference Area

L1X Hi-Lo TA List Revised

Training and Interning Staff Auditors

Word Clearing Series No. 31RA
Method 3 Word Clearing

Word Clearing Series No. 32RA
Word Clearing Method 4

Disagreement Remedy

Course Supervisor Correction List
Study Correction List 2R.
30 Mar 72 The Primary Correction Rundown Revised
Revised
380 May 72

2 Apr 72RB Expanded Dianetics Series No. 3RB
Issue II L3EXD RB—Expanded Dianetics Repair List
Revised

17 Mar 74

4 Apr 72 Primary Rundown Revised
Revised
30 May 72

7 Apr 72R Touch Assists Correct Ones
Revised & Reissued
23 Jun 74 as BTB

10 Apr 72 C/S Series No. 75
Solo C/S Series No. 13
Pre-OTs Don’t C/S

BTB
10 Apr 72R Prepchecks
Revised
17 Nov 74
12 Apr 72R Further Definitions of Scn Terms Contained in the

Revised & Reissued Student Hat and Not Elsewhere Defined
6 Sept 74 as BTB

15 Apr 72 Expanded Dianetics Series No. 1R
Revised Issue of
31 Mar 72
17 Apr 72 C/S Series No. 76
C/Sing a PTS Rundown
19 Apr 72 Quickie Defined
20 Apr 72 Expanded Dianetics Series No. 4
Suppressed PCs and PTS Tech
20 Apr 72 C/S Series No. 78
Issue II Product, Purpose and Why and WC Error Correction
26 Apr 72 Study Series No. 8

The Glib Student

521
2 May 72R

Revised & Reissued
10 Jun 74 as BTB

10 May 72

3 Jun 72R
Revised
15 Oct 74

10 Jun 72
Issue I
Reissued

21 Sept 74

15 Jun 72
19 Jun 72

21 Jun 72
Issue I

21 Jun 72
Issue II

21 Jun 72
Issue II

21 Jun 72
Issue IV

20 Jul 72
Issue I

20 Jul 72
Issue II

11 Aug 72RA

Revised

18 Sept 74 as BTB

30 Aug 72
Issue I
Issued

28 Mar 74 as BTB

522

Clearing Commands

Robotism

PTS Rundown, Final Step

By-passed Charge

C/S Series No. 80
“Dog PCs”

Word Clearing Series No. 37
Dinky Dictionaries

Word Clearing Series No. 38
Method 5

Word Clearing Series 39
Method 6

Word Clearing Series No. 40
Method 7

Word Clearing Series No. 41
Method 8
Primary Correction Rundown Handling

Distractive and Additive Questions and Orders

C/S Series No. 83RA
Correction Lists

Expanded Dianetics Series No. 8
30 Aug 72
Issue II
Issued
28 Mar 74 as BTB

2 Sept 72R

Revised & Reissued

27 Jun 74 as BTB

2 Sept 72
Issue II
Reissued
23 Aug 74 as BTB

2 Sept 72R
Issue III

Revised & Reissued

27 Nov 74 as BTB
5 Sept 72RA

Revised & Reissued

20 Aug 74 as BTB
Revised
25 Nov 74

18 Sept 72
Issued
28 Mar 74 as BTB

14 Oct 72R
Revises
31 Aug 72R

22 Oct 72
Reissued
28 Mar 74 as BTB

24 Oct 72
Issued
28 Mar 74 as BTB

1 Nov 72
Issued
28 Mar 74 as BTB

Expanded Dianetics Series 9

Why Finding Drill— One

Why Finding Drill— Two

Cramming Series 10
Good Cramming is the Key to
Flubless Auditors and Auditing

Cramming Series No. 11RA
High Crime Checkouts

Expanded Dianetics Series 10
Confidential
Modern Sec Checking (Confessional) Procedure-R

Expanded Dianetics Series 14

Expanded Dianetics Series 15
Expanded Dianetics Case [

Expanded Dianetics Series 19
Expanded Dianetics Case M

523
3 Nov 72R Auditor Admin Series 3R

Reissued The PC Folder and its Contents
18 Sept 74 as BTB
Revised
7 Feb 73
5 Nov 72R Auditor Admin Series 7R
Issue III The Folder Summary

Revised & Reissued
9 Sept 74 as BTB

5 Nov 72 Auditor Admin Series 8
Issue IV OCA Graphs
Reissued

2 Jul 74 as BTB

6 Nov 72R Auditor Admin Series 9R
Issue II The Program Sheet

Revised & Reissued
15 Jul 74 as BYB

6 Nov 72RA Auditor Admin Series 11RA
Issue IV The Exam Report
Revised & Reissued
30 Aug 74 as BTB

Revised

20 Nov 74
6 Nov 72R Auditor Admin Series 13R
Issue VI The Auditor Report Form

Revised & Reissued
27 Aug 74 as BTB

6 Nov 72R Auditor Admin Series 14R
Issue VII The Worksheets
Revised & Reissued
25 Jul 74
7 Nov 72R Auditor Admin Series 16R
Issue I Correction Lists

Revised & Reissued
12 Aug 74 as BIB

7 Nov 72R Auditor Admin Series 18R
Issue III L & N Lists
Revised & Reissued
28 Jul 74 as BYB

524
7 Nov 72R
Issue IV
Revised & Reissued
27 Jul 74 as BTB

8 Nov 72R

Issue I

Revised & Reissued
6 Aug 74 as BTB

8 Nov 72R
Issue II
Revised & Reissued
9 Sept 74 as BTB
Issue II

15 Nov 72
Issue II

4 Dec 72
Reissued
3 Jul 74 as BTB

6 Dec 72R
Revised & Reissued
23 Aug 74 as BTB

7 Dec 72R
Revised & Reissued
9 Jul 74 as BTB
Revised 1 Dec 74

11 Dec 72R
Revised

12 Feb 73
Reissued

11 Jul 74 as BTB

13 Dec 72R
Revised & Reissued
1 Nov 74

18 Dec 72
Reissued
9 Jul 74 as BTB

4 Jan 73
Reissued
6 Apr 74

Auditor Admin Series 19R
Dianetic Assessment Lists

Auditor Admin Series 21R
The Dianetic Flow Table

Auditor Admin Series 22R
Folder Error Summaries

Students Who Succeed

Integrity Processing Series 1
Historical

Integrity Processing Series 3R
Hi-Lo TA Assessment for Integrity
Processing and Confessionals

Integrity Processing Series 4R
Mid-Integrity Processing Short Assessment

Integrity Processing Series 8R
The Tech and Ethics of Integrity Processing

Integrity Processing Series 10R
Integrity Processing Questions
Must be F/Ned

Integrity Processing Series 15
Aspects of Integrity Processing

Study Series No. 9
Confront

525
20 Jan 73RB C/S Series No. 86RB

_ Revised The Red Tag Line
18 Sept 74
21 Jan 73RA Cramming Series 14RA

Revised & Reissued Backlogs and Stale-Dated Cramming Orders
1 Aug 74 as BTB
Revised 27 Nov 74

30 Jan 73RA Word Clearing Series No. 46RA
Issue II Method 9
Revised

29 Dec 73
Reissued

5 Jul 74 as BTB
Revised 20 Nov 74

5 Apr 73 Axiom 28 Amended
Reissued 19 Sept 74
1 Jul 73 Money Assist
Reissued
2 Jul 74 as BTB
3 Jul 73 Qual Flub Catch Series No. 1
Issue I The Flub Catch Line
Reissued
6 Jul 74 as BTB
29 Jul 73 Art, More About
BTB
29 Aug 73 Use the Technology on Help for the “Help” Button
15 Oct 73 C/S Series No. 87
Nulling and F/Ning Prepared Lists
20 Nov 73 21st Advanced Clinical Course
Issue I Training Drills
20 Nov 73 C/S Series No. 89
Issue II F/N What You Ask or Program
23 Nov 73 Dry and Wet Hands Make False TA
3 Dec 73 A Checklist of Processes for the Help Rundown
5 Dec 73 The Reason for Q & A

526
15 Dec 73

6 Jan 74

BTB
6 Jan 74
Issue II

BIB
6 Jan 74
Issue III

23 Jan 74RA
Revised
1 Nov 74

15 Feb 74
Amended &
Reissued

28 Mar 74

17 Feb 74

17 Mar 74

28 Mar 74
BTB

11 Apr 74
BIB

20 Jul 74

31 Aug 74

7 Sept 74

15 Oct 74

1 Nov 74

The Continuous Missed W/H and Continuous Overt with
Data on Degraded Beings and False PTS Conditions

‘Assist Summary Addition

Hobson-Jobsoning in Tape Translations

Word Lists, How to Do

The Technical Breakthrough of 1973!
The Introspection Rundown

Expanded Dianetics Series No. 20
Service Facsimile Theory and Expanded Dianetics

C/S Series 91
Mutual Out Ruds

TWC Checksheets
TWC, Using Wrong Questions

Expanded Dianetics Series No. 21
Expanded Dianetics Developments Since the Original Lectures

ARC Break Handling

Auditor Expertise Drills Series No. 1
Basic Auditing Drills

Urgent —C/S Series No. 93
New Grade Chart

Word Clearing Series No. 53
Superliteracy and the Cleared Word

Cramming Series 25
Cramming Over Out Ruds

Rock Slams and Rock Slammers

527
5 Nov 74
8 Dec 74
13 Mar 75

BTB
13 Mar 75

17 Mar 75

Drugs, More About
TRO —Notes on Blinking
TRs Training Breakthrough

Alternate Clear Sheet

Confidential Reissue

Hubbard Communications Office Policy Letters:

25 Jan 57
6 Oct 58
22 May 59

25 Jun 59

24 Feb 60

15 Mar 60
Reissued
9 Aug 74 as BPL

24 Nov 60
14 Feb 61
25 Mar 61

17 Jan 62
Reissued 7 Jun 67

27 Feb 62
17 May 62
9 Jul 62
10 Sept 62
12 Oct 62

21 Oct 62
12 Nov 62
8 Dec 62

11 Feb 63

528

Concerning the Separateness of Dianetics and Scientology
Who Can Be Processed — Who Can Be Trained

Policy Letter and Bulletin
Distribution Code

(Modifies HCO Policy Letter of
22 May 1959)

ACC Hats

Disseminating Scientology

Testing Promotion Revised
The Pattern of a Central Organization
Security Rules

Responsibility Again

Clean Hands Clearance Check

Staff Staff Auditor’s Hat

Special Briefing Course

Staff Clearing Program

Basic Purposes of A

Scientology Organization

Auditing Supervisor and Auditing Instructors, Duties Of
Purpose of the Saint Hill Special Briefing Course

Training — Saint Hill Special Briefing Course —
Summary of Subjects by Units

Auditing Regulations
13 Feb 63
15 Mar 68
11 Apr 63

2 Aug 63
12 Aug 63
21 Aug 63

5 Feb 64
24 Sept 64
27 Oct 64

30 Oct 64
18 Dec 64
2 Jan 65

7 Feb 65
Reissued 15 Jun 70

14 Feb 65
Reissued
7 Jun 67

27 Feb 65
4 Mar 65
5 Apr 65

5 Apr 65
Issue II

16 Apr 65
24 Apr 65
5 May 65

Reissued
4 Jul 70

9 May 65
Revised & Reissued
14 Jan 68

1 Jul 65 Issue III
4 Jul 65

V Unit

Checksheet Rating System
Goals Finding and Goal Finders
Urgent — Public Project One
Certificates and Awards

Change of Organization Targets
Project 80— A Preview

Founding Scientologist Certificate

Instruction & Examination: Raising The Standard Of

Policies on Physical Healing, Insanity and

“Troublesome Sources”

Mailing Lists for Franchise Holders

Saint Hill Org Board

Franchise: Who May Have It and How to Maintain It

All Levels — Keeping Scientology Working

Safeguarding Technology

Course Pattern
Hat Material

Handling the Suppressive Person
The Basis of Insanity

Academies Relation to HCO Justice Student Training —
The No-Gain-Case Student

The “Hidden Data Line”

Review

Classification, Gradation and Awareness Chart

Field Auditors Become Staff

Hats, the Reason For

PC Routing Review Code

529
23 Oct 65 Dissemination Drill

23 Dec 65 Ethics — Suppressive Acts
Suppression of Scientology and Scientologists —
The Fair Game Law

25 Jan 66 Distribution of Mimeo Issues
6 Feb 66 How to Increase and Expand
Reissued 12 Dec 74 an Organization
8 Mar 66 High Crime
13 Mar 66 Orders, Precedence of Personnel, Titles Of
21 Oct 66 City Office System
Issue I]
26 Dec 66 Admin Know-How— PTS Sections, Personnel and Execs
18 Sept 67 Study — Complexity and Confronting
20 Oct 67 Admin Know-How—Conditions, How to Assign
29 Jun 68 Enrollment in Suppressive Groups
3 Dec 68 Gung Ho Groups-— Poltr No. 2
6 Mar 69 Scientology is a Religion
27 Apr 69 Death Wish
11 May 69 Standard Admin for Training
and Tech Services
13 May 69 Cramming Section —Service to Trained Auditors
12 Jun 69 Dianetic Registration
9 Jul 69 “Confessional Aids (E-Meters) . . .”
27 Jul 69R What Is A Checksheet
Revised 16 Oct 74 as BPL
21 Sept 69 Staff Training Officer
5 Oct 69 Dianetic Courses Wildcat
Revised & Reissued
10 Dec 69
28 Mar 70 R6EW and Clear
7 Apr 70RA Green Form
26 Apr 70R Data Series IR
Revised 15 Mar 75 The Anatomy of Thought
11 May 70 Data Series No. 2— Logic
15 May 70 Data Series No. 5
Issue II Information Collection

530
19 May 70

22 Jul 70
Issue III

13 Aug 70

Issue I

30 Aug 70
22 Sept 70

24 Sept 70R
Revised
23 Jun 75

26 Sept 70
Issue III

13 Oct 70
Issue II

14 Oct 70
27 Oct 70
Issue II

1 Nov 70
Issue III
20 Nov 70
Issue II

6 Dec 70

4 Mar 71
Issue II

16 Mar 71R

Revised 29 Jan 75

13 Apr 71
15 Apr 71R

Revised 30 Mar 73

18 Jul 71
Issue II

12 Aug 71
Issue II

24 Aug 71

Data Series No. 8—Sanity

Tech Retreads and Retraining

PR Series No. 1
Liabilities of PR

Personnel Series No. 4
Recruiting Actions

Personnel Series No. 9
Org Series No. 4 Hats

Issues — Types of

Organizing Series No. 5
Org Board Cutatives

Data Series 19— The Real Why

Div IV Org Board, Ideal Scenes and Stats

The Course Supervisor
You Can Be Right

The Students Rabble Rouse Line

Personnel Series No. 13
Org Series No. 18
Third Dynamic De-aberration

How To Do Theory Checkouts and Examinations
What is a Course

Hubbard Qualified Scientologist Course Checksheet

Hubbard Apprentice Scientologist Course
The Student Folder
Additional Policies on Advanced Courses Security

Interne Checksheets Okays to Audit

531
29 Aug 71

Corrected &

Reissued
14 Oct 71

20 Oct 71
21 Oct 71

Revised & Reissued

22 Apr 72

29 Oct 71
Issue III

23 Nov 71R
Issue II
Revised

18 Dec 71

4 Dec 71
Issue V

8 Jan 72
Issue I

26 Jan 72
Issue V

2 Feb 72
Issue II
Cancelled
26 Aug 72

16 Feb 72

18 Feb 72
22 Feb 72

29 Feb 72
Issue II

7 Mar 72
Revised
13 Apr 72

16 Mar 72
Issue V

4 Apr 72
5 Apr 72

Issue I

532

Urgent — Org Conditions
Stat Change — Important

Selling Intensives
HQS Course Checksheet

Executive Series No. 2 Leadership

Tech Div Gross Divisional Statistics Clarification

Rules for Student Auditors
Inspection and Report Forms One
Scientology Level I Standard Academy Checksheet

Mini Technical Division —4 Stage
Two Org Board Cancelled

The Purpose of the Department
of Personal Enhancement

Executive Series No. 8—The Top Triangle
Interneship Errors Found

Data Series No. 24
Handling, Policy, Plans, Programs, Projects and
Orders Defined

Establishment Officer Series No. 1R
High Crime — What Is A Course

Establishment Officer Series 14— Ethics
PTS Type A Handling
12 Apr 72RA-1
Issue II
Revised 18 Aug 72

2 May 72
3 May 72

12 May 72

26 Jun 72

25 Jul 72

6 Aug 72R
Revised 10 Oct 72

6 Sept 72
Issue II

22 Sept 72

5 Nov 72R
Revised 19 Oct 73

5 Nov 72RA
Revised 19 Oct 73
Revised and

The Student Hat Checksheet for Students Who Are Not on
Primary RD or Primary Correction RD

HCO— Numbering of Mimeo Issues
Executive Series 12

Ethics and Executives

Ethics — Executive Series 13
Finance Series 12— Personnel Series 25
PTS Personnel and Finance

Establishment Officer Series 20
Supervisor Tech

Establishment Officer Series 24
The Form of the Org

Merchandising of Primary Rundown
and Primary Correction Rundown

The Clearing Course — Confidential

The Basic Principles of Translating
External Communications Series No. 11

Standard Telex Abbreviations

External Communications
Series No. 11LRA
Standard Telex Abbreviations

Reissued 16 Jul 75 as BPL

16 May 73R
Revised 16 Jul 73

13 Jul 73
28 Jul 73RA
15 Aug 73

24 Sept 73R
Issue I
Revised & Reissued
8 Apr 75 as BPL

21 Oct 73R
Updated 28 Jan 75

14 Jan 74R
Issue I

Let A Student Be A Student— Revised

LRH Image in Orgs
Cancellation of AVU Fast Flow
Flag Representative, Orders to

Religion

Case Supervisor Statistic

New Issues

Revised 27 Sept 74 as a BPL

533
BPL 9 Mar 74

17 Mar 74

13 Jul 74
Issue II

31 Aug 74
Issue II

BPL 13 Apr 75

Understanding Corporate Integrity
(HCO PL 23 Apr 73 Issue III Revised and Reissued
as a Board Policy Letter)

Press Conferences, Preparation For

Org Series 34
Working Installations

Urgent - Important
Fast Flow Training Reinstated

Technical Training Corps

LRH Tape Recorded Lectures

1950
5008C30
5009C23
5009C23
5009CM23A
5009CM23B
5009CM28
5011C22
5011CM25
5011CM30

1951
5108CM13A
'5108CM13B
5109CM17A
5109CM17B
5109CM24A
5109CM24B
5110CM01

534

LECT Preventive Dianetics

LECT General Dianetics— Part 1

LECT General Dianetics— Part 2

LECT Introduction to Dianetics

LECT What Dianetics Can Do

LECT Stalled Cases

STP Auditor’s Code and Accessibility
LECT ARC and Four Dynamics

LECT Standard Procedure (Step 3)

HEV-2 Human Evaluation — Lect 2

HEV-3 Human Evaluation — Lect 3

LECT Some Notes on Black Dianetics
LECT The Cellular Postulate

OCTSER Effort Processing Definition of Effort
OCTSER Effort Processing

OCTSER Self-Determinism — Effort Processing
5110CM08A
5110CM08B
5110CM11A
5110CM11B
5112CM28A
5112CM28B
5112CM29A

5112CM29B

5112CM30A

5112CM30B

1952
5202C25

5203CM03A
5203CM03B

5203CM03C

5203CM04A
5203CM04B
5203CM05A
5203CM05B
5203CM05D
5203CM06A
5203CM06B
5203CM07A
5203CM07B
5203CM08

OCTSER
OCTSER
OCTSER
OCTSER
DEC CONF
DEC CONF
DEC CONF

DEC CONF

DEC CONF

DEC CONF

HPC-1

HCL-1
HCL-2

HCL-2A

HCL-3
HCL-4
HCL-5
HCL-6
HCL-6 Spec
HCL-7
HCL-8
HCL-9
HCL-10
HCL-11

Effort Processing by LRH

Axioms & Effort Processing

Dianetic Axioms 33 to 51

Theory of Epicenters — Self-Determinism
Chart of Attitudes

Life Continuum Theory

The Goal of Processing (The Ideal State
of Man) Part 1] Lecture 3

The Goal of Processing (The Ideal State of
Man) Part 2 Lecture 3

Effort Processing — Notes on Children’s

Tilnesses

Processing Yes-No-Maybe Remarks

Review of Progress of Dianetics and
Dianetics Business

Introduction to Scientology — Milestone 1}

Introduction to Scientology — Outline of
Therapy

Demonstration by Ron of E-meter,
Running Entities

Axioms (Intention)

Thought, Emotion, Effort
Thought and Preclears
Emotion

Demonstration of Auditing
Effort and Counter-Effort
Attack on the Preclear

How to Handle Facsimiles
Indoctrination of the Preclear

Resolution of Effort and Counter-Effort,
Overt Acts ‘

535
5203CM08A

5203CM09A

5203CM09B

5203CM10A

5203CM10C

5203CM10

5203CM10A
5203CM10B
5203CM — —
5203CM — —

5208CM——A

5208CM— —B
5205C20

5206CM23A

5206CM23B

5206CM23C

5206CM24A

536

HCL-12

HCL-13

HCL-14

HCL-15

HCL-17

HCL-18
HCL-19
HCL-20
HCL-23
HCL-25
HCL-27
HCL-27A
T-80-2A

T88-1

T88-2

T88-3

T88-4

Indoctrination in use of E-meter (Parts 1
and 2)

Thought, Emotion, and Effort, Counter-
Effort

Demonstration — Effort, Counter-Effort

Straightwire

Training Auditors; The Anatomy of
Facsimile One

Demo of New Method of Running Effort
and Counter-Effort

Entities (Demo cont'd)

History of Man—Series 1 —2

History of Man Series 3A

Theta Body

An Analyses of Memory Part 1

How to Search for Incidents on the Track
How to Search for Incidents on the Track

Decision: Maybes, Time, Postulates, Cause
and Effect in Relation to Dynamics

Thetan/Body, Anatomy of Maybe, The
Time Scale, Decision to be “Course
Outline,” Disentangling Body from Thetan,
Wide Open and Occluded Cases, What are
Entities

Matter, Solid Thought, Home Universe
Theory and Origin of Mest, Erasing. Law
on Time Scale, Incidents, Space and Time,
Restimulation, Forgetting, Emotional
Curve, Identity, Auditing

Mechanics of Aberration, Tone Scale and
Maybe, Axioms, Effort, Nowness and
Thenness, Axioms of Knowingness,
Pervasion, Q& A

Motions and Maybes, Attention Unit Flows,
Glares, Hypnosis, Control, Shock
5206CM24B

5206CM24C

5206CM24D
5206CM24E
5206CM24F
5206CM25A

5206CM25B
5206CM25C
5206CM26A

5206CM26B
5206CM26C
5206CM27A

5206CM27B
5206CM28A
5206CM28B

5207CM24A

5207CM24B

5208CM07A
5208CM07B
5208CM07C
5208CM07D
5209CM04A
5209CM04B

T88-5

T88-6

T88-7
T88-8
T88-9
T88-10

T88-11
T88-12
T88-13

T88-14
T88-15
T88-16

T88-17
T88-18
T88-19

T88 Sup
T88 Sup

T88 Sup
T88 Sup
T88 Sup
T88 Sup
T88 Sup
T88 Sup

Tone Scale of Attention Unit Behavior,
Formation of Ridges, Around Hollow
Spots, Attention Unit Running

Concept Running, Deds, Aloneness
Obsession and Motion

Validation and Invalidation
Overt Acts Motivators and Deds (Lect 1)
Overt Acts, Motivators, Deds (Lect 2)

Invalidation, Simplicity of Data, Counter-
Effort, Aberrated Thought, Overt Acts,
Motivators, Deds

Technique 88 and the Whole Track
Technique 88 and the Whole Track (Part 2)

The Anatomy of Dramatization, The
Actions of Energy

Acquisition of Bodies
Theta and Genetic Line

Confusion, Action of Track as a Result of
Energy Behavior

Symbological Processing

Q & A Period — Individualism

Q & A Period — Individualism
Behavior of Energy as it Applies to
Thought Flows

E-meter Behavior vs. Flow Lines and
Patterns

Straightwire

Standard Process of 88

A Straightwire Process— Lect 1
A Straightwire Process— Lect 2
Where We Are At

Creation and Use of Energy. Remedy for
Over and Under Abundance

537
5211C10
5212C01
5212C01
5212C01

5212C02
5212C02

5212C02
5212C02
5212C03
5212C03

5212C03
5212C04
5212C04
5212C04
5212C04
5212C04
5212C05
5212C05
5212C05
5212C06
5212C06

5212C08
5212C08
5212C09
5212C09

5212C09
5212C09

538

L&A-3
PDC-1
PDC-2
PDC-3

PDC-4
PDC-5

PDC-6
PDC-7
PDC-8
PDC-9

PDC-10
PDC-11
PDC-12
PDC-13
PDC-14
PDC-15
PDC-16
PDC-17
PDC-18
PDC-19
PDC-20

PDC-21
PDC-22
PDC-23
PDC-24

PDC-25
PDC-26

Logics 1—3
Scientology: How to Understand and Study It
E-meters; Description, Demonstration

Creative Processing, Demo of E-meter
Auditing
Locks, Secondaries, Engrams, How to Handle

Gradient Scales of Handling Space, Energy
and Objects

The ‘Q’: Highest Level of Knowledge
A Thetan Creates by Postulates— Q2
The Track of Thetan/G.E., Space/Time

Anatomy of Processing — Energy
Phenomena/Sensation

Specific Parts of Self-Determinism, Spacation
Spacation: Energy, Particles and Time
Spacation: Locating, Space, Time
Spacation: Anchor Points, Origin

The Logics: Methods of Thinking

The Logics: Infinity-Valued Logic

Cycles of Action

The Tone Scale: Moving the Pc Up the Scale
Conditions of Space/Time/Energy .
Axioms and Logics Further Data
Formative State of Scientology: Definition of
Logic

ARC/Cycles: Theory and Automaticity
More on Automaticity

ARC, Force, Be/Have/Do

What’s Wrong With This Universe: a
Working Package for the Auditor

Flows: Reverse Vector of Physical Universe

Flows: Characteristics Of
5212C09
5212C09
5212C10
5212C10

5212C10
5212C10
5212C10
5212C11
5212C11
5212C11
5212C11
5212C11
5212C12
5212C12
5212C12
5212C13
5212C13
5212C13
5212C13

 §212C138
5212C15
5212C15
5212C15
5212C16
5212C16
5212C16
5212C16
5212C17

PDC-27
PDC-28
PDC-29
PDC-30

PDC-31
PDC-32
PDC-33
PDC-34
PDC-35
PDC-36
PDC-37
PDC-38
PDC-39
PDC.-40
PDC-4]
PDC-42
PDC-43
PDC-44
PDC-45

PDC-46
PDC-47
PDC-48
PDC-49
PDC-50
PDC-51
PDC-52
PDC-53
PDC-54

Flows: The Part Force Bears in Clearing
Flows: The Part Force Bears in Clearing
Flows: Pattern of Interaction’

Flows: Rate of Change, Relative Size, Anchor
Points

Flows: Basic Agreements and Prove It!
Flows: Dispersals and Ridges

Anatomy of the Genetic Entity

8-8008: Understanding the Phenomena
The DEI Scale

Structure/Function: Selective Variations of
Chart of Attitudes: Rising Scale Processing
Rising Scale Processing

Game Processing

Games/Goals

SOP Issue 3: Postulate, Creative Process
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)

On Auditing: How to Succeed/Fail, Assess
SOP: Assessment (cont'd)

Development of Scientology: Characteristics
of Living Science

Goals: Rehabilitation of Thetan, Case Step 1
SOP Issue 5

SOP Spacation

SOP Spacation (cont’d)

SOP Spacation Step 3, Flow Processing
SOP Issue 5

Memory (Not Human Memory)

Memory and Automaticity

Summary to Date: Handling Step 1 and
Demo

539
5212C17
5212C17

5212C17
5212C18
5212C18
5212C18
5212C18
5212C18

1953
5303CM23

5303CM23
5303CM24
5303CM24
5303CM25

5308CM25

5308CM26
5303CM26
5303CM27
5303CM27
5304CM07
5304CM07
5304CM07
5304CM07
5304CM08
5304CM08
5311CMI7A

540

PDC-55
PDC-56

PDC-57
PDC-58
PDC-59
PDC-60
PDC-61
PDC-62

SPR LECT 1

SPR LECT 2
SPR LECT 3
SPR LECT 4
SPR LECT 5

SPR LECT 6

SPR LECT 7
SPR LECT 8
SPR LECT 9
SPR LECT 10
SPR LECT 13
SPR LECT 14
SPR LECT 15
SPR LECT 16
SPR LECT 17
SPR LECT 18
2ACC-1A

Demonstration on Step One (cont'd)

Discussion of Demo: Above Agreement with
Flows

Continued Demonstration Step 4

About the Press’ Tone Level: Psychometry
Chart of Havingness

How to Talk about Scientology

How to Talk to Friends about Scientology

Your Own Case: to You the Student

Review of Dianetics, Scientology and Para-
Dianetics/Scientology

What’s Wrong with the PC?
Steps 1-7 SOP Issue 5
SOP Issues (cont'd)

The Elements with Stress on How to Run
Matched Terminals

The Elements with Stress on How to Run
Matched Terminals

How and When to Audit

Present Time

SOP Utility

SOP Utility (cont'd)

Data on Case Level 5

More on Case Level 5

Exteriorization— Demo and Explanation
Demonstration (cont'd)

Case Level 6 and 7

Case Level 6 and 7 (cont’d) Psychotic

Opening Lecture—- Emotional Tone Scale
5311CM17
5$11CM17
5311CM17
5811CM18
5311CM18
5311CM19
5811CM19
5311CM20
5311CM20
5311CM24
5311CM24
5311CM27
5311CM27
5311CM30
5311CM30
5312CM07
5312CM07
5312CM08
5312CM08
5312CM09
5312CM09
5312CM10
5312CM10
5312CM11
5312CM13
5312CM13
5312CM14
5812CM14
5312CMI15
5312CM15

2ACC-1B
2ACC-2A
2ACC-2B
2ACC-4A
2ACC-4B
2ACC-5A
2ACC-5B
2ACC-6A
2ACC-6B
2ACC-8A
2ACC-8B
2ACC-11A
2ACC-11B
2ACC-13A
2ACC-13B
2ACC-17A
2ACC-17B
2ACC-18A
2ACC-18B
2ACC-19A
2ACC-19B
2ACC-20A
2ACC-20B
2ACC-21A
2ACC-21B
2ACC-22A
2ACC-22B
2ACC-23A
2ACC-23B
2ACC-24A

SOP 8— Ist Lecture

Getting Speed Up

Getting Speed Up Part 2

Step 2 Automaticity

Wasting a Machine

Effects, Reaching End of Cycle
More on Machines

Resistance to Effect

Plan of Auditing

Anchor Points, Knowingness, Location
Steps 5, 6, 7 Duplication, Unconsciousness
Anchor Points, Justice

Symbols

Space, Perception, Knowingness
Space Lack of Persistence
Barriers, Occlusion

SOP 8-C Outline of

SOP 8-C Essence of

Problems of Auditing
Summary: The Dynamics
Bodies

Knowingness

SOP 8-C General Discussion
SOP 8-C Patter

Force Part I

Force Part II

SOP 8-C: step 8, Definitions
Cause and Effect

SOP 8-C Step 5

Energy Problems

541
5312CM16
5312CM16
5312CM17
5312CM17
5312CM18
5312CM19
5312CM20
5312CM20
5312CM20
5312CM21
5312CM21
5312CM22
5312CM22

1954
5405CM12
5405C13
5405C20
5406CM05

5406CM--
5406CM--

5406CM--

5406CM--
5406CM--
5406CM--
5406CM--
5406CM--
5406CM--

542

2ACC-24B
2ACC-25A
2ACC-25B
2ACC-26A
2ACC-26B
2ACC-28A
2ACC-28B
2ACC-29A
2ACC-29B
2ACC-30A
2ACC-30B
2ACC-31A

2ACC-31B.

6ACC-5
6ACC-6
6ACC-17
UPC-1

UPC-2
UPC-3

UPC-4

UPC-5
UPC-6
UPC-7
UPC-8
UPC-9
UPC-10

Technique to Assign Cause
Comm Lines, Overt Act Motivator Sequence
SOP 8-C Formulas

The Only One

Space Opera

Mass

Communication

SOP 8-C: on Auditing
Reach/Withdraw

Ability to Accept Direction
Knowingness and Certainty
Havingness — Remedy of

Postulates

Basic Definitions
Definition: Cycle of Action and Time
Definitions, ARC

Opening Lecture — History of Dianetics and
Scientology

Procedure 30— Duplication

Theta-Mest Theory— Tone Scale Freedom,
Space, etc.

Opening Procedure by Duplication
(PRO-19)

Lecture and Processing

Group Processing(Look at that Object)
Workbook 31-G

Processing (Granting Beingness) Session I
Processing (Granting Beingness) Session II

Group Processing (What Do—Didn’t Have)
5406CM--
5406CM--
5406CM--

5406CM--

5407C19

5408CM20
5408CM20
5408CM20
5408CM20
5410CM04
5410CM04
5410CM05
5410CM06
5410CM07
5410CM08
5410CM08 & 10B
5410CM10C
5410CM10D
5410CM11
5410CM12
5410CM13
5410CM19
5410CM20
5410CM21
5410CM22
5410CM25
5410CM26
5410CM27

UPC-11
UPC-12
UPC-13
UPC-14

7ACC-25

AX-1
AX-2
AX-3
AX-4
8ACC-1A
8ACC-1B
8ACC-3
8ACC-4
8ACC-5A
8ACC-6
PIP

PIP

PIP
8ACC-7
8ACC-8
8ACC-9
8ACC-13
8ACC-14
8ACC-16
8ACC-17
8ACC-18
8ACC-19
8ACC-20

Theta Mest Theory Being a Problem Aspect
Group Processing (Solution to Something)
Process of Exteriorization

Group Processing (Straight Exteriorization
Processing)

Scientology and Civilization; PRO-1 and
PRO-3; also titled —Scientology: Its
General Background, Part 1 and Part 3

Axioms, Part I (PRO-13)
Axioms, Part II (PRO-14)
Axioms, Part III] (PRO-15)
Axioms, Part IV (PRO-16)
Introductory Lecture Part I
Introductory Lecture Part I
Elements of Processing
Two-Way Comm
Elementary Straightwire
Opening procedure of 8-C
Route I, Steps 4, 5, 6, 7
Route I, Steps 8, 9, 10, 11
Route I, Steps 12, 13, 14, 15
Opening Procedure by Duplication
Remedy of Havingness
Spotting Spots

Axioms of Dianetics

Parts of Man

Route 2-61; Route 2-62
Two-Way Communication
Communication and Straightwire
Survive

Hypnotism

543
5410CM28
5411CM01
5411CM02
5411CM05
5411029

5412CM06
5412CM09
5412CM10
5412CM13
5412CM14
5412CM16
5412CM20
5412CM21
5412CM22
5412CM22
5412CM23
5413CM23
5412CM24
5412CM27

1955

5501C14
5501C19
5501C21
5504C16
5506C03
5506C03
5506C06
5510C03
5510C06

544

8ACC-21
8ACC-23
8ACC-24
8ACC-27
HCAP-8
9ACC-1
9ACC-4
9ACC-5
9ACC-6
9ACC-7
9ACC-9
9ACC-10
9ACC-11
9ACC-12
9ACC-12A
9ACC-13
9ACC-13A
9ACC-14
9ACC-15

9ACC-24
PLS
9ACC-29
HPC LECT-5
ASMC-2
ASMC-3
ASMC-15
4LACC-1
4LACC-7

Process: What Would You Do If
Two-Way Communication

Homo Sapiens

Factors Present in Good and Bad Auditing
Two-Way Communication

Introduction to 9th ACC — Havingness
Communication Formula

Practice of Dianetics and Scientology
Conduct of the Auditor

Mechanics of Communication
Pan-Determinism and One-Way Flows
Games (Fighting)

Games (Anatomy of)

One-Way Flows (in Processing)

Q & A Period

Havingness and Communication Formulas °
After Lecture Comments

Pan-Determinism

Training New People

Perfect Duplicate, Life Continuum
Communication and ARC Triangle
Axioms: Laws of Consideration

Service Facsimiles

Practicalities of a Practical Religion
History of Research and Investigation
What Scientology is Doing

Fundamentals of Scientology and Rudiments

Communication and “I Don’t Know”
(Confusion)
5510C08 LPLS-1 Goals of Dianetics and Scientology

5510C10 4LACC.12 Communication and the Subject of
Communication

5510C13 4LACC-18 Affinity, Reality and Communication

5510C18 4LACC-23 Beginning and Continuing a Session

5511C05 4LACC-50 End of Course Lecture

1956

5608C— — HPC A6-4 Axioms 1—5

5610C22 15ACC-6 Scale of Reality

5610C24 15ACC-8 Cut Comm Lines (In and Out)

5610C26 15ACC-10 Learning Rates

5610C30 15ACC-12 Education

5611C01 OS-6 How to Handle Audiences

5611C15 OS-10 Definition of Organization: Part 2

1957

5701C14 16ACC-9 Conwol

5701€17 16ACC-12 Communication, Randomities of

5702C26 17ACC-2 ARC Triangle and Associated Scales

5702C27 17ACC-3 Communication and Isness

5702C28 17ACC-4 The Parts of Man

5703C01 17ACC-5 Problems: Their Handling and Running

5703C10 17ACC-10 Valences

5707C05 FC-7 Purpose and Need of Training Drills

5707C15 18ACC-1 What is Scientology?

5707C16 18ACC-2 CCH Related to ARC

5707C17 18ACC-3 Theory and Definition of Auditing

5707€25 18ACC-9 Scales (Effect Scale)

5707C26 18ACC-10 The Mind: Its Structure in Relation to

Thetan and Mest

545
1958

5802C07 19ACC-15 Help— How to Get Started

5802C13 19ACC-19 Other Processes—the Help Button
5808C05 20ACC-17 ARC

5809C01 AUDC-20 How to Run Present Time Problems
5810C29 5LACC-3 Types of Pictures

5811C07 5LACC-10 Detection of Circuits and Machinery
1959

5901C04 SC-5 Overt Act — Motivator Sequence
5901C26 21ACC-1 How a Process Works

5901C30 21ACC-5 The Grouper

5902C02 21ACC-6 Axiom 10

5904C08 SHPA-4 Scales

5911C12 IMACC-7 The Rule of the Weak Valence
5911025 IMACC-26 Individuation

5911C26 IMACC-27 The Constancy of Fundamentals of Dianetics

and Scientology

1960

6001C01 SMC.-2 Responsibility

6001C01 SMC-3 Overts and Withholds

6001C02 SMC-4 A Third Dynamic in Scientology; Why
People Don't Like You

6001C02 SMC-5 Marriage

6001003 SMC-9 Your Case

6009C13 1 SHACC-9 How Havingness Relates to Circuits

6009C14 1 SHACC-10 Formula of Havingness

6012C31 AHMC-1 The Genus of Dianetics and Scientology

6012C31 AHMC-2 The Things of Scientology

546
1961

6101C02 22ACC-1 Present Time Problems— Why Cases Don’t
Move

6101C22 ACSA-5 Cycle of Action, Time Track, Terminals,
Stable Datum, Reactive Thought

6102C14 35A ACC-14 Fundamentals of Auditing

Saint Hill Special Briefing Course Tape Lectures

6105C07 SH Spec 1 E-Meter Talk and Demo

6105C12 SH Spec 2 Assessment

6105C19 SH Spec 3 E-meter

6105C26 SH Spec 4 On Auditing

6106C01 SH Spec 5 Flattening Process and E-meter
6106C02 SH Spec 6 Flows, Pre-hav Scale, Primary Scale
6106C05 SH Spec 7 Routine One, Two and Three
6106C06 SH Spec 8 Routine One, Two and Three
6106C07 SH Spec 9 Points in Assessing

6106C08 SH Spec 10 Q & A Period and Ending an Intensive
6106C09 SH Spec 11 Reading E-meter Reactions

6106C12 SH Spec 12 E-meter Actions, Errors in Auditing
6106C13 SH Spec 13 Seminar—Q & A Period

6106C14 SH Spec 14 Seminar — Withholds

6106C15 SH Spec 15X Not Know

6106C16 SH Spec 16X Confront and Havingness— Routine 1, 2, & 3
6106C19 SH Spec 15 Q & A Period — Auditing Slowdowns
6106C20 SH Spec 16 Sec Check Questions — Mutual Rudiments
6106C21 SH Spec 17 Seminar at Saint Hill

6106C22 SH Spec 18 Running CCHs

6106C23 SH Spec 19 Q & A Period —CCHs— Auditing
6106C26 SH Spec 20 Dealing with Attacks on Scientology

547
6106C27
6106C28
6106C29
6106C30
6107C03
6107C04
6107C05
6107C06
6107C11
6107C12
6107C14
6107C18

6107C19

6107C20
6108C03
6108C04

6108C08
6108C09
6108C10
6108C11
6108C15
6108C16
6108C17
6108C18
6108C22
6108C23
6108C24
6108C29
6108C30

548

SH Spec 21
SH Spec 22
SH Spec 23
SH Spec 24

SH Spec 26X
SH Spec 27X

SH Spec 25
SH Spec 26
SH Spec 27
SH Spec 28
SH Spec 29
SH Spec 30

SH Spec 31

SH Spec 32
SH Spec 33
SH Spec 34

SH Spec 35
SH Spec 36
SH Spec 37
SH Spec 38
SH Spec 39
SH Spec 40
SH Spec 41
SH Spec 42
SH Spec 43
SH Spec 44
SH Spec 45
SH Spec 46
SH Spec 47

CCHs — Circuits

Raw Meat— Trouble Shooting Cases
Wrong Target —Sec Check

Training on TRs— Talk on-Auditing
Routing 1A — Problems

Problems and Solutions

Q & A Period — Procedures in Auditing
Routine 1A— Problems

Routine 1A— Problems and Solutions
Q & A Period

Checking Ruds and Withholds

Can't Have — Create — Fundamentals of
all Problems

Q & A Period: Auditor Effect on Meter

Games Conditions
Creation and Goals

Methodology of Auditing —
Not Doingness and Occlusion

Forgettingness

Q & A—Goals Search

Q& A—Goals Assessment, Behavior of Pc
Basics of Auditing — Matter of Factness

Q & A—Anatomy and Assessment of Goals
Unknown — Cyclic Aspect of Goals
Rudiments — Valences

Control of Attention

PT Ps — Unknownnesses

Basics of Auditing

Rudiments

Basics of Auditing

Auditing Quality
6108C31
6109C05
6109C06
6109C07
6109C12
6109C13
6109C14
6109C19

6109C20

6109C21
6109C26
6109C27
6109C28
6110C03
6110C04
6110C05
6110C10
6110C11
6110C12
6110C17
6110C18
6110C19
6110C24
6110C25
6110C26
6110C31
6111C01

6111C02
6111C07

SH Spec 48
SH Spec 49
SH Spec 50
SH Spec 51
SH Spec 52
SH Spec 53
SH Spec 54
SH Spec 55

SH Spec 56

SH Spec 57
SH Spec 58
SH Spec 59
SH Spec 60
SH Spec 61
SH Spec 62
SH Spec 63
SH Spec 64
SH Spec 65
SH Spec 66
SH Spec 67
SH Spec 68
SH Spec 69
SH Spec 70
SH Spec 71
SH Spec 72
SH Spec 73
SH Spec 74

SH Spec 75
SH Spec 76

What is Auditing?
Principles of Auditing
Subjective Reality
Reality in Auditing
Clearing Breakthrough
Sec Check and Withholds

Goals and Terminals Assessment

Q & A Period —Pre-hav, Sec Checks, ARC

Breaks Process

Q & A Period — What Knowable to Pc,

Attention, etc.

Smoothness of Auditing

Teaching the Field—Sec Checks
Q & A Period; States of Beingness
Grades of Auditors

The Prior Confusion

Moral Codes: What is a Withhold?
Sec Checking — Types of Withholds
Problems Intensive

Problems Intensive Assessment
Problems

Problems Intensive Procedures
Valences — Circuits

Q & A Period — Flows

Clearing

Importance of Goals Terminals
Security Checking Auditing Errors
Rudiments

Formation of Commands

How to Security Check
Routine 3-A

549
6111C08
6111C09
6111C14
6111C16
6111C21
6111C22
6111C23
6111C28
6111C29
6112C05
6112C07
6112C12
6112C13
6112C14
6112C20
6112C21
6201C09
6201C10
6201C11
6201C16
6201C17
6201C23
6201024
6201C25
6201C30
6201C31
6202C01
6202C06
6202C07
6202C08

550

SH Spec 77
SH Spec 78
SH Spec 79
SH Spec 81
SH Spec 82
SH Spec 83
SH Spec 84
SH Spec 85
SH Spec 86
SH Spec 88
SH Spec 90
SH Spec 91
SH Spec 92
SH Spec 93
SH Spec 95
SH Spec 96
SH Spec 97
SH Spec 98
SH Spec 99
SH Spec 100
SH Spec 101
SH Spec 103
SH Spec 104
SH Spec 105
SH Spec 106
SH Spec 107
SH Spec 108
SH Spec 111
SH Spec 112
SH Spec 109

Checking Case Reports
Effective Auditing
Routine 3-D

Points in Assessing
Running 3-D

Reading the E-meter
Auxiliary Pre-hav: 3D Scale
Havingness

E-meter Tips

Assessing 3-D
Expectancy of 3-D

Sec Checks in Processing
Assessing 3-D

Anatomy of Problems
Upgrading of Auditors
Probabilities of 3-D
Twenty-ten 3DXX

Sec Checks — Withholds
How to Audit

Nature of Withholds
Anatomy of 3-D GPM
Basics of Auditing
Training — Duplication
Whole Track
In-sessionness

Usage of 3DXX

Flows

Withholds

Missed Withholds
3DXX Assessment
6202C13
6202C14
6202C15
6202C20
6202C21
6202C22
6202C27
6202C27
6203C01
6203C01
6203C19
6203C19
6203C20
6203C20
6203C21
6203C21
6203C27
6203C29
6203C29
6204C03
6204C05

6204C05
6204C17
6204C17
6204C19
6204€C19
6204C24
6204C24
6204C26

SH Spec 110
SH Spec 117
SH Spec 118
SH Spec 113
SH Spec 114
SH Spec 119
SH Spec 115
SH Spec 116
SH Spec 120
SH Spec 121
SH Spec 122
SH Spec 123
SH TVD 1

SH TVD 2

SH Spec 124
SH Spec 125
SH Spec 130
SH Spec 126
SH Spec 127
SH Spec 131
SH Spec 128

SH Spec 129
SH Spec 132
SH Spec 133
SH Spec 134
SH Spec 135
SH Spec 136
SH Spec 137
SH Spec 138

Prep Clearing

Directing Attention
Prepchecking

What is a Withhold?

Use of Prepchecking
Prepclearing and Rudiments
Prepchecking

Auditor’s Code

Model Session I

Model Session II

The Bad “Auditor”
Mechanics of Suppression
3DXX Assessment

3DXX Assessment (cont'd)
Prepchecking

Prepchecking

Prepchecking Data

CCHs

Q and A Period

The Overt-Motivator Sequence

Sacredness of Cases — Self, Other,
and Pan-determined

As-isness, People Who Can and Can’t As-is
Auditing

How and Why Auditing Works

Gross Auditing Errors

Determining What To Run

Rundown on 3DXX

Rundown on 3DXX

Rundown on Prepchecking
(professional attitude)

Sol
6204C26
6205C01
6205C01
6205C02
6205C02
6205C03
6205C03
6205C15
6205C15
6205C16
6205C16

6205C17
6205C17
6205C22
6205C22
6205C23

6205C23

6205C24
6205C24
6205C29
6205C29
6205C20

6205C30
6205C31
6205C31
6206C12

552

SH Spec 139
SH Spec 140
SH Spec 141
SH TVD 4A
SH TVD 4B
SH Spec 142
SH Spec 143
SH Spec 144
SH Spec 145
SH TVD 5A
SH TVD 5B

SH Spec 146
SH Spec 147
SH Spec 150
SH Spec 151
SH TVD 6

SH TVD 7

SH Spec 148
SH Spec 149
SH Spec 152
SH Spec 153
SH TVD 8A

SH TVD 8B
SH Spec 154
SH Spec 155
SH Spec 160

Rundown on Routine 3: Routine 3AXX
Missed Withholds

Routine 3-G

Prepchecking (aud: LRH)
Prepchecking (pc: D. Broaded)
Craftsmanship — Fundamentals
Prepchecking

New Training Sections

New TRs

Patching Up 3DXX Cases

Patching Up 3DXX Cases (aud: LRH;
pes: H. Booker, M. Pernetta, J. Shelton,
F, Mueller, T. Reid)

Auditing Errors
Prepchecking
Administration of Courses

Missed Withholds

Check on ‘What’ Question and Havingness

Probe (pc: Smokey Angel)

Fish and Fumble —Checking Dirty Needle

(pc: Fred Hare)

E-meter Data — Instant Reads I
E-meter Data— Instant Reads II
Question and Answer Period
Security Check Prepchecking

Getting Rudiments In (aud: LRH;
pe: Reg Sharpe)

Getting Rudiments In (cont’d)
Value of Rudiments
Middle Rudiments

How To Do Goals Assessment
6206C12
6206C14
6206C14
6206C19
6206C19
6206C21
6206C21
6206C26
6206C26
6206C28
6206C28
6207C10

6207C10

6207C12
6207C12
6207C17
6207C17
6207C19
6207C19
6207C24
6207C24
6207C26
6207C26
6208C07
6208C07
6208C08

6208C09

SH Spec 161
SH Spec 156
SH Spec 157
SH Spec 158
SH Spec 159
SH Spec 162
SH Spec 163
SH Spec 164
SH Spec 165
SH Spec 166
SH Spec 167
SH Spec 168

SH Spec 169

SH Spec 174
SH Spec 175
SH Spec 170
SH Spec 171
SH Spec 172
SH Spec 173
SH Spec 176
SH Spec 177
SH Spec 178
SH Spec 179
SH Spec 180
SH Spec 181
SH TVD 11

SH Spec 182

Middle Rudiments

Future Technology

Listing

Do’s and Don'ts of R83GA
Question and Answer Period
Model Session Revised
Question and Answer Period
E-meter Quality
Prepchecking

Rudiments

Question and Answer Period

Repetitive Rudiments and Repetitive
Prepchecking, Part I

Repetitive Rudiments and Repetitive
Prepchecking, Part II

Meter Reading

Meter Training

E-meter Reads and ARC Breaks
Anatomy of ARC Breaks

The E-meter

Question and Answer Period
Routine 3GA Part I

Routine 3GA Part I

Routine 3GA

Prepchecking

Routine 3GA Data on Goals Part I
Routine 3GA Data on Goals Part II

Routine 3GA Nulling Goals
(aud: LRH; pc: M. Sue Hubbard)

Clearing

553
6208C09
6208C14
6208C14
6208C15

6208C15

6208C21
6208C22
6208C22
6209C18
6209C18
6209C20
6209C20
6209C25
6209C27
6209C27
6210C02
6210C03
6210C03
6210C04
6210C04
6210C09
6210C09
6210C11
6210C11
6210C23
6210C23
6210C25
6210C30
6210C21
6211C01
554

SH Spec 183
SH Spec 184
SH Spec 185
SH TVD 12A

SH TVD 12B

SH Spec 188
SH TVD 13A
SH TVD 13B
SH Spec 189
SH Spec 190
SH Spec 191
SH Spec 192
SH Spec 194
SH Spec 195

SH Spec 195A

SH Spec 196
SH TVD 15A
SH TVD 15B
SH Spec 198
SH Spec 199
SH Spec 200
SH Spec 201
SH Spec 202
SH Spec 203

SH Spec 202A
SH Spec 203A

SH Spec 209
SH Spec 204
SH Spec 205
SH Spec 206

Goals Listing
Rock Slam and Dirty Needles
World Clearing

3GA Dynamic Assessment — Listing Items
for Dynamics, I

3GA Dynamic Assessment — Listing Items
for Dynamics, II

Basics of Auditing

Dynamic Assessment and Item Assessment I
Dynamic Assessment and Item Assessment II
Directing Pc’s Attention

3GA Dynamic Assessment by Rock Slam
Listing Lines

Geriatrics

3GA Assessment

3GA Listing

3GA Listing

3GA Listing Lines by Tiger Buttons
Prepchecking a Goal Part 1
Prepchecking a Goal Part 2

Modern Security Checking

Making a Goal Fire

Future Org Trends

Instructors Bug-Bear

38GA Goals Finding

3GA Goals Finding

3GA Criss Cross

3GAXX Following the Rock Slam
3GAXX Secondary Pre-hav Scale
Pre-hav Scales and Lists

Listing Goals

The Missed Missed Withhold
6211C01
6211C13
6211C13
6211C15
6211C15
6211C20
6211C20
6211C22
6211C22
6211C27
6211C27
6211C29
6211C29
6212C11
6212C11
6212C13
6212C13
6301C08
6301C08
6301C10
6301C10
6301C15
6301C15
6301C16
6301C16
6302C07
6302C07

6302C12
6302C13
6302C13
6302C14

SH Spec 207
SH Spec 210
SH Spec 211
SH Spec 212
SH Spec 213
SH Spec 214
SH Spec 215
SH Spec 216
SH Spec 217
SH Spec 218
SH Spec 219
SH Spec 220
SH Spec 221
SH Spec 222
SH Spec 223
SH Spec 224
SH Spec 225
SH Spec 226
SH Spec 227
SH Spec 228
SH Spec 229
SH Spec 230
SH Spec 231
SH Spec 232
SH Spec 233
SH Spec 234
SH Spec 235

SH Spec 236
SH Spec 237
SH Spec 238
SH Spec 239

The Road to Truth
The Difficult Case
Entrance to Cases
Terminals

Clearing Technology
The GPM
Fundamentals of Auditing
Q & A Period Part 1
Q & A Period Part 2
Routine 2-12
Routine 2-12

R2-12 Theory and Practice Part 1
R2-12 Theory and Practice Part 2

R2-12 Data

Phantom RS

R2-12 Data— Needle Behavior
Repair of R2-12—Clean Needle
R2-10 and R2-12

Case Repair

R2-12

How to Audit

R2-12 Dead Horses

R2-12 Nevers

TVD 16, TR-0 Demo

TR-O Lecture

R-3 MX

R-3 MX

Routine 3M

TVD 16, Unit Rud. and Hav.
Discussion of Above by LRH
Routine 3M

595
6302C19
6302C20
6302C21
6302C26
6303C05
6303C07
6303C19
6303C20

6303C21
6303C27

6304C04
6304C02
6304C18
6304C23
6304C25
6304C30
6305C14

6405C15

6305C16
6305C21
6305C22

6305C23
6305C28
6305C29
6305C30
6306C11

556

SH Spec 240
SH Spec 241
SH Spec 242
SH Spec 243
SH Spec 245
SH Spec 247
SH Spec 250
SH TVD 18

SH Spec 251
SH Spec 254

SH Spec 255
SH Spec 256
SH Spec 258
SH Spec 259
SH Spec 260
SH Spec 261
SH Spec 263

SH Spec 264

SH Spec 265
SH Spec 266
SH Spec 267

SH Spec 268
SH Spec 269
SH Spec 270
SH Spec 271
SH Spec 273

Rundown on Processes

Finding RR&

R-2 and R-3 Current Auditing Rundown
R-3M Current Rundown by Steps

R-2 and R-3 Urgent Data

When Faced with the Unusual, Do the Usual
R3M How to Find Goals

Rudiments and Havingness Session and
Short Lecture (aud: LRH; pc: R. Sharpe)

R2-G Series

TVD 19, Sec Checking (aud: R. Sharpe;
pe: Leslie Van Der Statten) Talk by LRH

Anatomy of the GPM

Line Plot, Items

Directive Listing

Goals Problems Mass

Finding Goals

Directive Listing

Implant GPMs

TVD 20, Blocking Out and Dating Items
and Incidents Prior to Implants
The Time Track

The Helatrobus Implants

TVD 21, Engram Running — Helatrobus
Implant, Goal “To be serious”
(aud: LRH; pc: M.S. Hubbard)

State of OT

Handling ARC breaks
Programming Cases Part 1
Programming Cases Part 2

Engram Chain Running
6306C12
6306C13
6306C18
6306C19
6306C20
6306C25
6306C26
6306C27
6307C09
6307C10
6307C10
6307C10
6307C11
6307C16
6307C17
6307C18
6307C23
6307C24
6307C25
6308C06
6308C07
6308C08
6308C14
6308C15
6308C20
6308C21
6308C22
6308C27
6308C28
6308C29

SH Spec 273
SH Spec 274
SH Spec 275
SH Spec 276
SH Spec 277
SH Spec 278
SH Spec 279
SH Spec 280
SH Spec 281
SH Spec 282

SH Spec 284A
SH Spec 284B

SH Spec 283
SH Spec 285
SH Spec 286
SH Spec 287
SH Spec 288
SH Spec 289
SH Spec 290
SH Spec 291
SH Spec 292
SH Spec 293
SH Spec 294
SH Spec 295
SH Spec 297
SH Spec 297
SH Spec 298
SH Spec 299
SH Spec 300
SH Spec 301

ARC Straightwire

Levels of Case

Beingness

Summary of Modern Auditing
History of Psychotherapy
Routine 2-H

TVD 22 Listing Assessment for Engram Running
TVD 23 Listing Assessment for Engram Running

The Free Being

Auditing Skill for R3R
Preliminary Steps of R3R, Part 1
Preliminary Steps of R3R, Part 2
ARC Breaks

Tips on Running R3R

Dating

Errors in Time

Between Lives Implants

ARC Breaks and the Comm Cycle
Comm Cycles in Auditing
Auditing Comm Cycles

R2-H Fundamentals

R2-H Assessment

Auditing Tips

The Tone Arm

The Itsa Line

The Itsa Line (cont'd)

Project 80

Rightness and Wrongness

The TA and the Service Facsimile

The Service Facsimile (cont'd)

557
6309C03
6309C04
6309C05
6309C10
6309C11
6309C12
6309C17
6309C18
6309C19
6309C25
6309C26
6310C15
6310C16
6310C17
6310C21
6310C22
6310C23
6310C29
6310C30
6310C31
6311C05
6311007
6311C26
6311C27

6311C28
6312C04
6312C05
6312C10
6312C12

558

SH Spec 302A
SH Spec 302
SH Spec 303
SH Spec 304
SH Spec 306
SH Spec 305
SH Spec 307
SH Spec 308
SH Spec 309
SH Spec 310
SH Spec 311
SH Spec 312
SH Spec 313
SH Spec 314
SH Spec 315
SH Spec 316
SH Spec 317
SH Spec 318
SH Spec 319
SH Spec 320
SH Spec 321
SH Spec 322
SH Spec 323
SH Spec 330

SH Spec 324
SH Spec 326
SH Spec 327
SH Spec 328
SH Spec 329

R3SC
How to Find a Service Facsimile

Service Fac Assessment

Destimulation of a Case

Service Facs and GPMs

Service Facs

What You are Auditing

St. Hill Service Fac Handling
Routine 4M TA

Summary IT Scientology 0
Summary III about Level IV Aud.
Essentials of Auditing

The Itsa Maker Line

Levels of Auditing

Attack and GPMs

The Integration of Auditing
Auditing the GPM

Routine 4

R4 Case Assembly

R4M2 Programming

Three Zones of Auditing
Relationship of Training to OT
R4 Auditing ~

TVD 25, Auditing Demo and Comments

by LRH

Seven Classifications
TVD 24, Basic Auditing
Basic Auditing
Scientology 0

Summary of OT Processes
6312C31
6401C07
6401C09
6402C04
6402C06
6402C25
6403C03
6403C05
6403C10

6403C17
6403C19
6403024
6404C10
6404C14
6404C16
6404C21
6404C28
6404C30

6405C19
6406C04
6406C09

6406C16
6406C18
6406C30
6407C02
6407C07
6407C09
6407C15

SH Spec 1
SH Spec 2
SH Spec 3
SH Spec 4
SH Spec 5
SH Spec 6
SH Spec 7
SH Spec 8
SH Spec 9

SH Spec 11
SH Spec 12
SH Spec 13
SH Spec 14
SH Spec 15
SH Spec 16
SH Spec 17
SH Spec 18
SH Spec 19

SH Spec 20
SH Spec 21
SH Spec 22

SH Spec 23
SH Spec 24
SH Spec 25
SH Spec 26
SH Spec 27
SH Spec 28
SH Spec 30

Indicators

Good Indicators (Lower Levels)
Bad Indicators

Auditor Self Criticism

Comm Cycle in Auditing

What Auditing Is and What It Isn’t
Auditing and Assessment

Case Analysis — Healing

Summary of Lower Levels —
Clearing at Level Four

The Road to Perfection

Flattening a Process

International City

How to Manage a Course

The Classification-Gradation Program
Auditing by Lists

Problems and Solutions

Wisdom as an Auditor

Effectiveness of Processing

The Preclear and Getting Auditing to Work
R6 Auditing Skills

The Cycle of Action — Its Interpretation
on the E-meter

“Communication” Overts and Responsibility
Studying, Introduction

Gause Level, OT and the Public

O/W Modernized and Reviewed
Dissemination

Studying — Data Assimilation

Organizational Operation

559
6407C29
6407C30
6408C04
6408C06
6408C11
6408C13
6409C01
6409C03
6409C15
6409C22
6409C29
6410C13
6410C20
6410C27
6411C03
6411C10
6411C04
6411C17
6412C15
6412C22
6412C30
6502C23
6503C02
6503C09
6503C30
6504C06
6504C13
6504C27
6505C11
6505C18

560

SH Spec 31
SH Spec 32
SH Spec 33
SH Spec 34
SH Spec 35
SH Spec 36
SH Spec 37
SH Spec 38
SH Spec 39
SH Spec 40
SH Spec 41
SH Spec 42
SH Spec 43
SH Spec 44
SH Spec 45
SH Spec 46
SH Spec 48
SH Spec 47
SH Spec 49
SH Spec 50
SH Spec 51
SH Spec 52
SH Spec 53
SH Spec 54
SH Spec 56
SH Spec 57
SH Spec 58
SH Spec 59
SH Spec 60
SH Spec 61

Campaign to Handle Psychosomatic IIls
Psychosomatic —Its Meaning in Scientology
A Summary of Study

Study — Gradients and Nomenclature
Evaluation of Information

Study and Education

The P.E. Course

Clearing — What It Is

Scientology and Tradition

A Review of Study

Gradients

Cycles of Action

Levels—The Reason for Them

The Failed Case

Programmes

PT Ps, Overts and ARC Breaks

Comments on Clay Table TVD by LRH
Styles of Auditing

Communication — A Gradient on Duplication
Mastery of the GPMs )
Pattern of the Bank

Level VII

Technology and Hidden Standards

The New Organization Structure

ARC Breaks and Generalities

Org Board and Livingness

The Lowest Levels

Awareness Levels

ARC Breaks and PTPs, The Differentiation

Organization and Ethics
6505C25 SH Spec 62 The Five Conditions

6506C08 SH Spec 63 Handling the PTS
6506C29 SH Spec 64 The Well-Rounded Auditor
6507C27 SH Spec 65 Stages of Release
6509C09 SH Spec 66 Classification and Gradation (filmed lecture)
6509C21 SH Spec 67 Out Tech
6510C14 SH Spec 68 Briefing to Review Auditors
6607C19 SH Spec 69 About Rhodesia
6607C21 SH Spec 70 Dianetic Auditing
6607C26 SH Spec 71 The Classification Chart and Auditing
6607C28 SH Spec 72 Dianetic Auditing and the Mind
6608C02 SH Spec 73 Suppressives and GAEs
6608C04 SH Spec 74 Dianetics, Scientology and Society
6608C16 SH Spec 75 Releases and Clears
6608C18 SH Spec 76 Study and Intention
6608C23 SH Spec 77 Organization
6608C25 SH Spec 78 The Antisocial Personality
6609C01 SH Spec 79 Gradients and ARC
6609C08 SH Spec 80 States of Identity
6611C01 SH Spec 81 Government and Organization
6611C29 SH Spec 82 OT and Clear Defined
6612C06 SH Spec 83 Scientology Definitions II
6612C13 SH Spec 84 Scientology Definitions III
6711C18 SO A Talk to Saint Hill and
Worldwide Ethics Officers
6809C24SO CL VIII-1 Welcome to the Class VITE Course — An
Introduction to Standard Tech
6809C25SO CL VIH-2 What Standard Tech Does
6809C26SO CL VII-3 The Laws of Case Supervision
6809C27SO CL VIII-4 Standard Tech Defined

561
6809C28SO
6809C29SO
6809C30SO

6810C01SO
6810C02SO
6810C03SO
6810C07SO0
6810C08SO
6810C09SO
6810C10SO
6810C11SO
6810C12SO
6810C13SO
6810C14SO
6810C15SO

6905C14
6905C29
6907C23
7006C21
7009C16
7106C12
7109C05

7203C01 SO I
7203C01 SO II
7203C02 SO I
7203C02 SO II
7203C03 SO I
7203C03 So II

562

CL VHI-5
CL VIII-6
CL VII-7

CL VIUI-8

CL VIII-9

CL VIII-10
CL VII-11
CL VIII-12
CL VII-13
CL VII-14
CL VII-15
CL VHI-16
CL VII-17
CL VII-18
CL VIII-19

sO

SO Spec-1
sO

SPEC LECT
sO

sO

sO

ESTO 1
ESTO 2
ESTO 3
ESTO 4
ESTO 5
ESTO 6

The Standard Green Form and Rudiments
Mechanics of Techniques and Study Matter
Case Supervisor Do's and Don’ts— The
Total Rationale and Background of
Auditing

Certainty of Standard Tech

Laws of Listing and Nulling

Assists

Assessments & Listing Basics

More on Basics

Ethics and Case Supervision

Auditor Attitude and the Bank

Auditor Additives, Lists and Case Supervising
Standard Tech

The Basics and Simplicity of Standard Tech
The New Auditor's Code

An Evaluation of Examination Answers
and Data on Standard Tech

New Sea Org Purpose

The Dianetic Program

Whither Are We Going

Expanded Grades and Training

A Talk on Dept 18

Welcome to the Flag Intern Course

A Talk on Basic Qual

Establishment Officers Instant Hat
Establishment Officers Instant Hat
Evaluation and Handling of Personnel
Evaluation and Handling of Personnel
Handling Personnel

Handling Personnel
7203C04 SOI
7203004 SO II
7203C05 SO I
7203C05 SO II
7203C06 SO I
7203C06 SO II
7203C30
7204C07
7204C07
7204C07

ESTO 7
ESTO 8
ESTO 9
ESTO 10
ESTO 11
ESTO 12
sO

SOI
SOII
SO III

Hold the Form of the Org

Hold the Form of the Org

Revision of Prod/Org System

Revision of Prod/Org System

F/Ning Staff Members

F/Ning Staff Members

Expanded Dianetics

Expanded Dianetics and Word Clearing
Auditor Administration

Iilness— Breakthrough

Miscellaneous References

Executive Directives

ED 110R FLAG Upper Level Data 21 Feb 72

Flag Bureaux Data Letters

FBDL 245 The Modern Confessional 23 Nov 72

FBDL 245-1 Integrity Processing and the Hubbard Integrity 7 Jan 73

Processing Specialist Course

FBDL 279 Weekly Stat Briefing Sheet W/E 29 Mar 73 30 Mar 73

FBDL 328 The Hubbard Senior Course Supervisor Course 14 Aug 73
‘ (HSCSC)

Flag Orders

FO 1483 Personnel 17 Oct 68

FO 2192 Programming Unit Basic Hat 14 Nov 69

FO 2354 The Keeper of Tech Duties and Responsibilities 28 Jan 70

FO 3076 Non Sea Org Tech Pay and Bonuses 20 Nov 71

FO 3179 (CBO 190) Aide and A/Aide Responsibility 25 Apr 72

Flag Orders of the Day

Flag OODs LRH Command Item 17 May 71

563
Flag Ship Orders
FSO 65 Student Orientation Checksheet
FSO 529 Esto Apprentice Training

HCO Information Letters

HCO Info Ltr Who are the Quacks?

HCO Info Ltr Ron’s Journal No. 8

HCO Info Ltr Two Types of People

HCO Info Ltr Anatomy of the Human Mind Course

LRH Executive Directives
LRH ED 2 INT Attestation Reinstated

LRHED2US | PDH
and 2 WW only
LRH ED 9 Urgent Dianetics

LRH ED 18 INT Dianetic Case Gain
LRH ED 57 INT What to Sell
LRH ED 143 INT = The World Begins with TR 0

LRH ED 257 Delivery Repair Lists

Operational Bulletins

Op. Bull 1 The following Auditing Commands. . .
Op. Bull 5 Limited Company Proceeding . . .

Op. Bull 9 The Turn of the Tide

Op. Bull 13 Operational Bulletins Growing Up

Op. Bull 17 Fur Flying in Washington

Six Levels of Processing
SLP Issue 7 Rev Special Western Congress Release
Sea Organization Executive Directives

SO ED 96 INT Central Authority New Command and
Communication Lines

SO ED 135 INT The Social Counselor Course
Technical Individual Programs
TIP 1 Technical Individual Programs

564

21 Jun 70

18 Mar 72
Corr & Reiss
22 Mar 72

22 Sept 63
5 Feb 64
2 Apr 64
2 Sept 64

20 Jan 69
9 Mar 69

11 May 69
17 Jul 69
14 Dec 69
21 May 71
1 Dec 74

20 Oct 55
Undated
19 Dec 55
17 Jan 56
14 Feb 56

Undated

17 Dec 70

18 Jan 72

20 Jun 71
About the Author

L. RON HUBBARD was born on the 13th of March, 1911, in
Tilden, Nebraska, USA, to Commander Harry Ross Hubbard of the US
Navy and Dora May Hubbard (nee Waterbury de Wolfe).

He grew up in Montana with old frontiersmen and cowboys, and had
an Indian medicine man as one of his best friends. Here in Montana, L.
Ron Hubbard had his first encounter with another culture, the Blackfoot
(Pikuni) Indians. He became a blood brother of the Pikuni and was later
to write about them in his first published novel, Buckskin Brigades.

By the time he was twelve years old, he had read a good number of
the world’s greatest classics and began to take interest in the fields of
religion and philosophy. During this time, while living in Washington,
D.C., he became a close friend of President Calvin Coolidge’s son, Calvin
Jr., whose early death accelerated L. Ron Hubbard’s interest in the mind
and spirit of Man.

From 1925 to 1929, his father’s career took the family to the Far East
where L. Ron Hubbard journeyed throughout Asia, exploring out-of-the-
way places, and saw many new peoples and customs.

In 1929 with the death of his grandfather, the Hubbard family
returned to the United States and there L. Ron Hubbard continued his
formal education. He attended Swavely Prep School in Manassas,
Virginia, and went to high school at Woodward School for Boys in
Washington, D.C.

In 1930, he graduated from Woodward with honors, and enrolled at
George Washington University Engineering School in the fall. He became
the associate editor of the university newspaper and was a member of
many of the university's clubs and societies, including the Twentieth
Marine Corps Reserve and the George Washington College Company.

While at George Washington University, he learned to fly and
discovered a particular aptitude as a glider pilot. Here, also, he was
enrolled in one of the first nuclear physics courses ever taught in an
American university.

As a student, barely twenty years old, he supported himself by
writing, and within a very few years he had established himself as an
essayist in the literary world.

565
Even though he was very busy during these college years, L. Ron
Hubbard still found time for his exploring. In 1931, at the age of twenty,
he led the Caribbean Motion Picture Expedition as a director, and
underwater films made on that journey provided the Hydrographic Office
and the University of Michigan with invaluable data for the furtherance
of their research. And again in 1932, at twenty-one years of age, L. Ron
Hubbard led another expedition conducting the West Indies Mineral-
ogical Survey and made the first complete mineralogical survey of
Puerto Rico.

Although very active now in several areas, L. Ron Hubbard
continued his writing. Under about twenty different pen names millions
of words poured from his pen and into print, including both fact and
fiction, travel articles, stories of exploration and adventure, essays and
anecdotes, science fiction, and western stories appearing in over ninety
magazines and journals.

In 1935, L. Ron Hubbard went to Hollywood and worked under
motion picture contracts as a scriptwriter. He is still very active in
Hollywood’s movie production.

While in Hollywood he continued his study of “What makes men
tick,” and in his own statement, L. Ron Hubbard dates the discovery of
the primary law of life, summarily expressed by the command “Survive!”
at 1938.

In 1940, as a duly elected member of the Explorers Club of New
York, L. Ron Hubbard conducted the Alaskan Radio Experimental
Expedition. He was awarded the Explorers Club flag for conducting this
expedition, Also, in 1940, he earned his “License to Master of Steam and
Motor Vessels,” and within four and a half months obtained a second
certificate attesting to his marine skill: “License to Master of Sail Vessels”
(“Any Ocean’).

In 1941, like many other young men of his generation, L. Ron
Hubbard was commissioned in the US Navy. He served in all five theaters
of the war. In 1944 he was severely wounded and was taken crippled and
blinded to Oak Knoll Naval Hospital. It was here that L. Ron Hubbard
did much of his early research on the human mind. At this time, he
already had a great deal of data on what was known about the mind.
Earlier, between the years of 1923 and 1928, he had received an extensive
education in the field of the human mind from Commander Thompson
of the Medical Corps of the US Navy, a friend of his father and a
personal student of Sigmund Freud. Injured, L. Ron Hubbard faced an
almost non-existent future, yet he worked his way back to fitness, strength

566
and full perception in less than two years, using only what he knew and
could determine about Man and his relationship to the universe.

Some of his early research was spent determining whether the mind
regulated the body or the body regulated the mind. If the mind was
capable of putting restraint upon the physical body, then obviously the
fact that was commonly held to be true, that the body regulated the
mind, was false. He went about proving this.

And so, L. Ron Hubbard continued studying, researching, and
synthesizing this knowledge with what he had learned of Eastern
philosophy, his understanding of nuclear physics, and his experiences
among men,’ to form some of the basic tenets of Dianetics and
Scientology.

After leaving Oak Knoll, the study, work, writing and research
continued at a rapid pace. And then in 1948, he wrote Dianetics: The
Original Thesis, his first formal report of the mysteries of the mind and
life, which was a thirty-thousand word revelation.

The interest in Dianetics spread like wildfire. Letters asking for
clarifications and advice and more data poured in, and just answering
them was becoming a full-time occupation.

So the work continued, work on an extensive popular text on the
subject of Dianetics that would answer all questions. In May of 1950,
Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health exploded onto the
booklists, leapt to the top of the New York Times Best-Seller List and
stayed there. It is still a best seller today.

L. Ron Hubbard then founded in 1950 the Hubbard Dianetic
Foundation in Elizabeth, New Jersey to facilitate auditing and training
the public in Dianetics. :

During the next twenty-five years many, many churches and missions
were established all over the planet to professionally deliver L. Ron
Hubbard’s technology standardly to the peoples of the world.

The founder of Dianetics and Scientology, L. Ron Hubbard, lives
with his wife, Mary Sue, and their children: Quentin, twenty-one;
Suzette, twenty; and Arthur, sixteen. Their eldest ‘daughter, Diana,
twenty-two, is happily married.

Today, L. Ron Hubbard continues his life’s work unabated, writing,
researching and exploring new avenues and hitherto unexplored realms
of life and the human spirit.

567
Contact your nearest
Church or Mission

UNITED STATES

ADVANCED
ORGANIZATION

Church of Scientology of California
Advanced Organization

of Los Angeles

916 South Westlake Street

Los Angeles, California 90006

SAINT HILL
ORGANIZATION

Church of Scientology

American Saint Hill Organization
2723 West Temple Street

Los Angeles, California 90026

PUBLICATIONS
ORGANIZATION

Church of Scientology
Publications Organization
c/o ASHO

2723 West Temple Street

Los Angeles, California 90026

CELEBRITY CENTRES

Church of Scientology
Celebrity Centre

1809 West 8th Street

Los Angeles, California 90057

Church of Scientology
Celebrity Centre New York
65 East 82nd Street

New York, New York 10028

Organizacion de Dianetica
Celebrity Centre Mexico
120 Alta Vista

San Angel Inn

Mexico 20 DF, Mexico

Church of Scientology
Celebrity Center

344 Carlton Avenue
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

LOCAL CHURCHES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

Founding Church of Scientology
2125 S Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20008

AUSTIN

Church of Scientology
2804 Rio Grande
Austin, Texas 78705

HAWAII

Church of Scientology
143 Nenue Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96821

SAN DIEGO

Church of Scientology
926 “C” Street
San Diego, California 92101

SAN FRANCISCO

Church of Scientology
414 Mason Street
San Francisco, California 94102

569
LAS VEGAS

Church of Scientology
2108 Industrial Road
Las Vegas, Nevada 89102

LOS ANGELES

Church of Scientology
2005 West 9th Street
Los Angeles, California 90006

PORTLAND

Church of Scientology
333 S.W. Park
Portland, Oregon 97205

SEATTLE

Church of Scientology
1531 4th Avenue
Seattle, Washington 98101

ST. LOUIS

Church of Scientology
3730 Lindell Boulevard
St. Louis, Missouri 63108

TWIN CITIES

Church of Scientology
730 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55403

BOSTON

Church of Scientology
448 Beacon Street
Boston, Massachusetts 02115

BUFFALO

Church of Scientology
1116 Elmwood Avenue
Buffalo, New York 14222

DETROIT

Church of Scientology
19 Clifford Street
Detroit, Michigan 48226

570

MIAMI

Church of Scientology
1235 Brickell Avenue
Miami, Florida 33131

NEW YORK

Church of Scientology
49 West 32nd Street
New York, New York 10001

SACRAMENTO

Church of Scientology
2007 O Street
Sacramento, California 95814

PHILADELPHIA

Church of Scientology
8 West Lancaster Avenue
Ardmore, Pennsylvania 19003

CHICAGO

Church of Scientology
1555 Maple Street
Evanston, Illinois 60201

CANADA

TORONTO

Church of Scientology
124 Avenue Road
Toronto 180, Ontario

VANCOUVER
Church of Scientology
4857 Main Street

Vancouver 10
British Columbia

OTTAWA

Church of Scientology
292 Somerset Street, West
Ottawa
MONTREAL

Church of Scientology

1168 St. Catherine Street, W. 101
Montreal, Quebec H3B 1K1

UNITED KINGDOM

ADVANCED
ORGANIZATION/
SAINT HILL

Hubbard College of Scientology
Advanced Organization Saint Hill
Saint Hill Manor

East Grinstead, Sussex

LOCAL CHURCHES

Saint Hill Foundation
Saint Hil] Manor
East Grinstead, Sussex

PLYMOUTH

Hubbard Scientology Organization
39, Portland Square

Sherwell

Plymouth, Devon

MANCHESTER

Hubbard Scientology Organization
48 Faulkner Street
Manchester

LONDON

Hubbard Scientology Organization
68, Tottenham Court Road
London W. 1

SCOTLAND

HAPI

Fleet House

20, South Bridge
Edinburgh, Scotland

AUSTRALIA/
NEW ZEALAND

ADELAIDE

Church of the New Faith
57 Puleteney Street
Adelaide 5000

South Australia

MELBOURNE

Church of the New Faith

724 Inkerman Road -

North Caulfield 3161
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

PERTH

Church of the New Faith
Pastoral House

#156 St. George’s Terrace
Perth 5000

Western Australia

SYDNEY

Church of the New Faith

1 Lee Street

Sydney 2000

New South Wales, Australia

AUCKLAND

Church of Scientology
New Imperial Buildings
44 Queen Street
Auckland, New Zealand

571
EUROPE

ADVANCED
ORGANIZATION

Church of Scientology

Advanced Organization Denmark
Jernbanegade 6

1608 Copenhagen V

Denmark

SAINT HILL
ORGANIZATION

Church of Scientology
Saint Hill Denmark
Jernbanegade 6

1608 Copenhagen V
Denmark

PUBLICATIONS
ORGANIZATION

Church of Scientology
Publications Organization
c/o SH Denmark
Jernbanegade 6

1608 Copenhagen V
Denmark

LOCAL CHURCHES

COPENHAGEN

Church of Scientology
Hovedvagtsgade 6
1103 Copenhagen K
Denmark

Church of Scientology of Copenhagen

Frederiksborgvej 5
2400 Copenhagen NV
Denmark

PARIS

Church of Scientology

12 rue de la Montagne Ste
Genevieve, 75005 Paris
France

572

VIENNA

Scientology-Osterreich

A-1070 Wien

Mariahilferstrasse 88A/Stg. 3/1/9
Vienna, Austria

BRUSSELS

Church of Scientology
45A Rue de Il’Ecuyer
1000 Brussels

Belgium

AMSTERDAM

Church of Scientology
Singel 261
Amsterdam, Netherlands

MUNICH

Church of Scientology
8000 Munich 2
Lindwurmstrasse 29
West Germany

GOTEBORG

Church of Scientology
Magasinsgatan 12

S-411 18 G&teborg, Sweden

STOCKHOLM
Church of Scientology
Drottninggatan 53
$-111 21 Stockholm
Sweden

MALMO

Church of Scientology
Skomakaregatan 12
§-211 34 Malmé
Sweden
AFRICA

JOHANNESBURG

Church of Scientology
99 Polly Street
Johannesburg, South Africa, 2001

CAPE TOWN

Church of Scientology

3rd Floor Garmor House

127 Plein Street

Cape Town, South Africa, 8001

DURBAN

Church of Scientology
57 College Lane
Durban, South Africa, 4001

PORT ELIZABETH

Church of Scientology

9 Lowcliffe House

Main Street

Port Elizabeth, South Africa, 6001

PRETORIA

Church of Scientology

224 Central House

Cnr Central & Pretorious Streets
Pretoria, South Africa, 0002

BULAWAYO

Church of Scientology
210-211 Kirrie Bldgs

Cnr Abercorn & 9th Avenue
Bulawayo, Rhodesia

MISSION LIST

IN U.S.A.

Scientology Mission of Albuquerque
613 San Mateo Blvd NE.
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87108

Scientology Mission of Amarillo
2046 S. Hayden
Amarillo, Texas 79109

Scientology Mission of Berlin
1240a Farmington Avenue
Berlin, Connecticut 06037

Scientology Mission of Boston
69 Broad Street
Boston, Massachusetts 02110

Scientology Mission of Boulder
Box 995
Boulder, Colorado 80302

Scientology Mission of Cambridge
8 Essex Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

Scientology Mission of Central Ohio
3894 N. High Street
Columbus, Ohio 43214

Scientology Mission of Charlotte
1000 Dilworth Rd.
Charlotte, North Carolina 28203

Scientology Mission of Chicago
108 East Oak Street
Villa Park, Illinois 60181

Scientology Mission of Delaware Valley
Suite 924, 1 Cherry Hill Mall
Cherry Hill, New Jersey 08034

Scientology Mission of Denver
375 S. Navajo
Denver, Colorado 80223

Scientology Mission of El Paso
7308A Alameda
El Paso, Texas 79915

Scientology Mission of Fifth Avenue
30 Fifth Avenue
New York, New York 10011

Scientology Mission of Ft. Lauderdale
423 N. Andrews Ave.
Ft. Lauderdale, Florida 33301

Scientology Mission of Houston
4034 Westheimer
Houston, Texas 77027

Scientology Mission of Huron Valley
203 East Ann
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48108

Scientology Mission of Kansas City
4528 Main St.

Kansas City, Missouri 64111
Scientology Mission of Lakeview
1928 W. Montrose

Chicago, Illinois 60613
Scientology Mission of New Hope
4144 Shady Oak Road
Minnetonka, Minnesota 55343
Scientology Mission of New Jersey
5 Main St.

Flemington, New Jersey 08822

573
Scientology Mission of New York
500 West End Ave., Suite 2B
New York, New York 10024

Scientology Mission of North Manhattan

Apt. 2A, 251 West 98th Street
New York, New York 10025

Scientology Mission of Omaha
103 S. 35 Ave.
Omaha, Nebraska 68131

Scientology Mission of Peoria
920 W. Main Street
Peoria, Illinois 61606

Scientology Mission of Puerto Rico
PO Box 211

Old San Juan PO

San Juan, Puerto Rico 00902

Scientology Mission of Richardson
114. N. McKinney
Richardson, Texas 75080

Scientology Mission of San Antonio
Colonies North Mall,

3723 Colony Dr.

San Antonio, Texas 78230

Scientology Mission of Southwest
P. O. Box 8386
Dallas, Texas 75205

Scientology Mission of Urbana
Grenada House, 1004 S. 4th
Champaign, Illinois

Scientology Mission of Waterbury
42 Bank Street
Waterbury, Connecticut 06702

Scientology Mission of Westchester
11 Parrott Street
Cold Spring, New York 10516

Scientology Mission of Adams Avenue
6911 El Cajon Blvd.
San Diego, California 92115

Scientology Mission of Berkeley
1918 Bonita Avenue
Berkeley, California 94704

Scientology Mission of Castro Valley
20730 Lake Chabot Road
Castro Valley, California 94546

Scientology Mission of Orlando
Box 14045
Orlando, Florida 32807

Scientology Mission of Sacramento
1725 23rd Street
Sacramento, California 95816

574

Scientology Mission of East Bay
411-15th Street
Oakland, California 94612

Scientology Mission of Flagstaff
4469 Mountain Meadow Drive
Flagstaff, Arizona 86001

Scientology Mission of Hawaii
1282 Kapiolani Blvd.
Honolulu, Hawaii 96814

Scientology Mission of Lake Tahoe
P. O. Box 1540
South Lake Tahoe, California 95705

Scientology Mission of Long Beach
1261 Long Beach Blvd.
Long Beach, California 90813

Scientology Mission of Los Gatos
10 Jackson Street, No. 111
Los Gatos, California 95030

Scientology Mission of Meadows
1326 Las Vegas Blvd. S.
Las Vegas, Nevada 89101

Scientology Mission of Orange County
1451 Irvine Blvd. .
Tustin, California 92680

Scientology Mission of Palo Alto
600 Middlefield Road
Palo Alto, California 94301

Scientology Mission of Pasadena
634 E. Colorado Blvd.
Pasadena, California 91101

Scientology Mission of Phoenix
1722 E. Indian School Rd.
Phoenix, Arizona 85016

Scientology Mission of Phoenix
331 N. 1st Avenue
Phoenix, Arizona 85003

Scientology Mission of Riverside
3485 University Street
Riverside, California 92501

Scientology Mission of Sacramento
5136 Arden Way
Carmichael, California 95608

Scientology Mission of Salt Lake City
253 East 2nd S.
Salt Lake City, Utah 84111

Scientology Mission of Santa Barbara
746 State Street
Santa Barbara, California 93101

Scientology Mission of Santa Clara
4340 Stevens Creek, No. 180
San Jose, California 95129
Scientology Mission of SCS
3802 Riverside Dr.
Burbank, California 91505

Scientolgy Mission of South Bay
607 S. Pacific Coast Highway
Redondo Beach, California 90277

Scientology Mission of Tucson
2100 E. Speedway
Tucson, Arizona 85719

Scientology Mission of Valley
13561A Ventura Blvd.
Sherman Oaks, California 91403

Scientology Mission of Washoe Valley
319 E. 6th
Reno, Nevada 89501

Scientology Mission of Westwood/Wilshire

10930 Santa Monica Blvd.
Los Angeles, California 90025

Scientology Mission of Albany
141 Brunswick Road
Troy, New York 12180

Scientology Mission of Arlington
818 N. Taylor Street

Arlington, Virginia 22203
Scientology Mission of Chadds Ford
Baltimore Pike

Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania 19317

Scientology Mission of Cleveland
PO Box 636, 4192 E. 187th Street
Cleveland, Ohio 44122

Scientology Mission of Elmira
111 N. Main Street
Elmira, New York 14902

Scientology Mission of Erie
528 West 18th
Erie, Pennsylvania 16502

Scientology Mission of New London
398 Broad Street
New London, Connecticut 06230

Scientology Mission of Putney
Wabena Stables
Putney, Vermont 05346

Scientology Mission of Anderson
PO Box 664
Anderson, Indiana 46016

Scientology Mission of Carbondale
417 S. Illinois Avenue

Carbondale, Illinois 62901
Scientology Mission of Cincinnati
2417 Vine Street

Cincinnati, Ohio 45219

Scientology Mission of Colorado Springs
1119 No. Cooper
Colorado Springs, Colorado 80905

Scientology Mission of St. Charles
138 North Main Street
St. Charles, Missouri 63301

Scientology Mission of Chula Vista
192 Landis Street
Chula Vista, California 92010

Scientology Mission of Fresno
1350 “O” St.
Fresno, California 93721

Scientology Mission of Goldengate
1807 Union Street, No. 2
San Francisco, California 94128

Scientology Mission of Newport Beach
341 Bayside Dr.
Newport Beach, California 92660

Scientology Mission of Portland
709 SW Salmon Street
Portland, Oregon 97205

Scientology Mission of Santa Rosa
806 Sonoma Avenue .
Santa Rosa, California 95402

Scientology Mission of Sheridan
RT 2 Box 195
Sheridan, Oregon 97378

Scientology Mission of Stockton
47 W. Acacia St.
Stockton, California 95204

Scientology Mission of Walnut Creek
2363 Blvd. Circle No. 5
Walnut Creek, California 94595

Scientology Mission of Davis
1046 Olive Drive
Davis, California 95616

Scientology Mission of Burbank
124 N. Golden Mall
Burbank, California 91502

Mission of Scientology
1640 Welton
Denver, Colorado 80202

Mission of Scientology
9610 82nd Ave.
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

Mission of Scientology
264 Weybosset
Providence, R.1. 02903

Mission of Scientology
250 Main St.
Worcester, Mass, 01608

575
Mission of Scientology
P. O. Box 4-830
Anchorage, Alaska 99509

Celebrity Center Las Vegas
2004 S. Western St.
Las Vegas, Nev. 89102

Mission of Scientology
3352 Jefferson Ave.
Cincinnati, Ohio 45220

Mission of Scientology of Central Oklahoma
P. O. Box 101
Edmond, Oklahoma 73034

Mission of Scientology of Maumee Valley
1941 Jermain Dr.
Toledo, Ohio 43606

Mission of Scientology of Columbus
45 Euclid Ave.
Columbus, Ohio 43201

Mission of Scientology Greenbrier
Coleman Drive
Lewesburg, W. Va. 24901

Mission of Scientology of Santa Fe
330 Montezuma
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501

Mission of Scientology of Quebec City
781 Blvd. Charest Est #3

Quebec, P.Q., Canada

Mission of Scientology of Charlottetown

139 Kent St.
Charlottetown, P.E.I., Canada

CANADA
Scientology Mission of Hamilton

281 John Street N.
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada

Scientology Mission of Niagara
455 St. Paul St. St. Catherine's
Ontario, Canada

Scientology Mission of Vancouver
1524 West 6th Avenue

Vancouver 8, British Columbia
Canada

Scientology Mission of Winnipeg
410 Spence Street
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada

Scientology Mission of London
148 Dundas St.

London, Ontario, Canada
Scientology Mission of Windsor
437 Oulette Street

Windsor, Ontario, Canada

576

Scientology Mission of Regina
2023 St. John
Regina, Sasketchewan

Scientology Mission of Halifax
1585 Barrington Street, No. 208
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada

Scientology Mission of St. John
15 Charlotte Street
St. John, New Brunswick, Canada

Scientology Mission of Kitchener
241 King Street West, No. 14
Kitchener, Ontario, Canada

Scientology Mission of Edmonton
PO Box 1198
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

Scientology Mission of Calgary
340 15th Avenue South West
Calgary, Alberta, Canada

NEW ZEALAND

Scientology Mission of Christchurch
35 Rapaki Road
Christchurch 2, New Zealand

Scientology Mission of Ellerslie
1 Ranier Street

Ellerslie

Auckland, New Zealand

SOUTH AFRICA

Dianetic Counselling Center Johannesburg
(in S.A. [Pty.] Ltd.)

608 African City Bldg., Sixth Floor

100 Eloff Street

Johannesburg

Scientology Mission of Pietermaritzburg
(in S.A. [Pty.] Ltd.)

411 Alexandra Road

Pietermaritzburg

Scientology Mission of Welkom

PO Box 33

Welkom 9460

Scientology Mission of Windhoek
PO Box 21039
Windhoek 9100 South West Africa

AUSTRALIA

The New Faith Mission of Melville
15 Birdwood Road
Melville, Western Australia 6156
EUROPE

Scientology Mission of Angers
43, rue Proust
49000 Angers, France

Scientology Mission of Berlin
1000 Berlin 12,
Giesebrechstrasse 10, Germany

Bogenhausen College fur Angewandte
Philosophie

D-8 Munchen 80

Widenmayerstrasse 28/0

West Germany

Scientology Mission of Brabant
rue du Pacifique 4
Bruxelles, Belgium B-1180

Scientology Mission of Franken
D-71 Heilbronn
Rosenberg Str 44, W. Germany

Scientology Mission of Frankfurt
6000 Frankfurt Am Main
Kennedy Allee 33

West Germany

Scientology Mission of Hamburg
2000 Hamburg 36,
Gerhofstrasse 18, W. Germany

Institut fur Angewandte Philosophie
D-8 Munchen 70
Kidlerstrasse 10, Germany

Scientology Mission of Paris
147 Rue St. Charles
75 Paris 15, France

Strandvejens Scientology Center
Skellebaekvej 2

3070 Snekkersten

Denmark

Scientology Mission of Stuttgart
7000 Stuttgart 1

Neuebrucke 3

West Germany

Scientology Mission of Zurich
Mulibachstrasse 423/6
8185 Winkel-Ruti, Switzerland

Scientology Mission of Basel
Gerbergasslein 25
CH-4051 Basel, Switzerland

Scientology Mission of Bern
Hotelgasse 3,
3011, Bern Switzerland

Dianetic College Frankfurt
6000 Frankfurt-Fechenheim
Lachnerstrasse 6, West Germany

Scientology Mission of Helsingborg
Lidangsgatan 23
253 71 Helsingborg, Sweden

Scientology Mission of Lucerne
Talackerhalde 22,
6010 Kreins, Switzerland

Institut de Philosophie Appliquee
29 bis rue des Noailles
78000 Versailles, France

UNITED KINGDOM

Scientology Mission of Birmingham
128A Alcester Road

Moseley,

Birmingham 13, England

Scientology Mission of Helensburgh
121 West King Street

Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire
Scotland

Scientology Mission of Southampton
33 Runnymede

West End, Southampton, Hampshire
England

Scientology Mission of Swansea
1 Highpool Close, Newton,
Mumbles, Swansea, Wales

Scientology Mission of Reading
“St. Michael's”, Shinfield Rd.
Reading, Berkshire, England

Scientology Mission of Charnwood Forest
109 Meeting Street, Quorn
Loughborough, Leicestershire

Scientology Mission of Kirkwood
“Kirkwood House”, Biggar
Lanarkshire, Scotland

Scientology Mission of Leeds
27 Manor Drive
Leeds LS6 1DE Yorkshire

OTHER AREAS

Scientology Mission of Mexico
Avenida Nuevo Leon 159 T.,
Mexico 11 DF, Mexico

Scientology Mission of Mexico
AP 21875

Mexico 21 DF, Mexico
Scientology Mission of Mexico
Campos Eliseos 205

Mexico 5 DF, Mexico
Scientology Mission of Negev
P. O. Box 698

Beer Sheva, Israel

Scientology Mission of Rio de Janeiro
Praia de Botafogo 472, Apt 913
Rio de Janeiro, GB, Brazil

577
